This software is from "Databar - The
Monthly Bar Code Software Magazine"
which was published in 1983, and turned
out to only have one issue published,
so it wasn't very monthly after all.

These programs were to be scanned in
from barcodes using a special barcode
reader that attached to the Atari.

Only 13 Atari programs were ever
published in this format, and they
are all on this disk.

See the original articles with barcodes
here:
archive.org/details/@allan52?and[]=databar

Thanks to Allan Bushman for scanning
the magazine, @doegox on Twitter for
writing the python script to decode the
barcodes without the scanner, and 
@travisgoodspeed for the PoC||GTFO
'zine, which was instrumental in
bringing the pieces together.

www.alchemistowl.org/pocorgtfo/

For more background on the format, see
wiki.yobi.be/wiki/Databar_decoding
and
github.com/doegox/Oscar

Interviews with folks from Databar
will be published (or have been,
depending on when you read this) in
ANTIC The Atari 8-Bit Podcast, at 
www.AtariPodcast.com or 
archive.org/details/ANTIC_podcast

Kevin Savetz
June 22 2016
twitter.com/KevinSavetz
