ON-BOARD FAULT MANAGEMENT FOR AUTONOMOUS SPACECRAFT 


Lorraine M. Fesq 
Amy Stephan 
Susan C. Doyle 
Eric Martin 
Suzanne Sellers 

TRYw 

Engineering and Test Division 
One Space Park 
Bldg. R9/1869 
Redondo Beach, CA 90278 
(213) 814-6073 Phone 
(213) 814-8068 FAX 

Statement of technical details of the capability being described 

The dynamic nature of the Cargo Transfer Vehicle's (CTV) mission and the 
high level of autonomy required mandate a complete fault management system 
capable of operating under uncertain conditions. Such a fault management 
system must take into account the current mission phase and the environ- 
ment (including the target vehicle), as well as the CTV's state of health. 
This level of capability is beyond the scope of current on-board fault 
management systems. 

This presentation will discuss work in progress at TRW to apply artificial 
intelligence to the problem of on-board fault management. The goal of 
this. work is to develop fault management systems that can meet the needs 
of spacecraft that have long-range autonomy requirements. 

We have implemented a model -based approach to fault detection and iso- 
lation that does not require explicit characterization of failures prior 
to launch. It is thus able to detect failures that were not considered in 
the failure and effects analysis. We have applied this technique to 
several different subsystems and tested our approach against both simu- 
lations and an electrical power system hardware testbed. 

We present findings from simulation and hardware tests which demonstrate 
the ability of our model -based system to detect and isolate failures, and 
describe our work in porting the Ada version of this system to a flight- 
qualified processor. We also discuss current research aimed at expanding 
our system to monitor the entire spacecraft. 

History of the origins & evolution of the capability 

TRW has been actively researching the application of artificial intelli- 
gence to on-board fault management since 1987. Initial work focused on 
rule-based and fault-modeling approaches, but because these methods can 
only detect a subset of possible failures, they were deemed inadequate for 
autonomous fault monitoring. In 1988, we began to examine a model -based 
fault-management technique called constraint suspension and have success- 


S??- /% 
/!&s, amy 

/l/c, yfo 

f . ^ 

93-22255 


29 


fully used this technique to isolate faults in both simulations and an 
electrical power system testbed. We have developed a tool for building 
model -based diagnostic systems, called MARPLE, and used this tool to build 
in-house fault management systems as well as a contingency analysis 
monitoring system for the NASA LeRC Space Station Freedom power testbed. 

The level of maturity of the capability 

The MARPLE fault management approach is in its third year of development. 
It has been through the design, code, and prototype phases. We are 
currently addressing the remaining issues to make MARPLE a realizable on- 
board system. These issues Include verification and validation, real-time 
response, and integration into a flight software package. 

Test experience and/or experimental results 

The MARPLE system has been through two years of prototype testing. A 
MARPLE-based power diagnostic system was first tested against a software 
electrical power system simulator. This simulator enabled extensive 
testing of many fault scenarios, including sensor failures, component 
degradations, and external threats such as laser and pellet attacks. This 
same diagnostic system was then integrated into a hardware power system 
testbed, and failures were induced into the actual hardware (to the extent 
allowed by the power engineers). These hardware tests demonstrated one of 
the major strengths of the MARPLE-based technique â€” its ability to 
isolate failures without characterizing the symptoms a priori. 

Capabilities and limitations of the MARPLE technique were realized through 
these tests. Modifications are currently planned to enable MARPLE to 
realize its own limitations and thereby avoid false diagnoses. 

Source/sponsorship and current funding estimates 

This effort is being pursued on Internal Research and Development funds. 

In addition, NASA LeRC sponsored a contract effort to apply the results of 
this IR&D to the Space Station Freedom Power System. 


Q-2- 


