/ " > ~ 





Title: ARTSN: An Automated Real-Time Spacecraft Navigation System 

i 

Authors: Dr. P. Daniel Burkhart and Vincent M. Pollmeier 

An effort is underway at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) to design a 
filter to automate the deep space navigation process. This project, the 
Automated Real-Time Spacecraft Navigation (ARTSN) filter task, is part of the 
Deep Space Network (DSN) Advanced Technology Program. 

The prototype is currently a FORTRAN77 package operating on an HP-9000/700 
series workstation running HP-UX 9.05. This will be converted to C, which 
will be the maintained operational version. The processing tasks required can 
be divided into four groups; read a measurement, integrate the spacecraft 
state to the current measurement time, compute the observable based on the 
integrated state, and incorporate the measurement information into the state 
using an EKF. This filter processes radiometric 

data (currently only two-way dif ferenced-range Doppler) collected using the 
DSN. The dynamical (force) models currently include point mass gravitational 
terms for all planets, Sun and Moon, solar radiation pressure, finite 
naneuvers, and attitude maintenance activity modeled quadratically . In 
addition, observable errors due to the troposphere are included. Further data 
-ypes, force models and observable models will be included to enhance the 
accuracy of the models and capability of the package. The heart of ARTSN is 
a current-state continuous-discrete extended Kalman filter. This is a 
ieparture from the epoch state/pseudo-epoch state formul&tion used currently 
for deep space navigation, but is necessary to mesh withâ€™ the data driven 
lature of real time processing. The filter is 

Implemented in the standard form , except for the use of the general covariance 
ipdate formula for an arbitrary gain matrix to enhance the numerical 
properties of the process. Further numerical enhancement using UD and/or SRIF 
rorras of the Kalman filter will be implemented. 

Results will be presented for the simulated data used to. test the 
.mplementation at various stages of development, along with results from 
>rocessing actual mission data. 


229 




