
VOLUME 5 - ISSUE 8 AUGUST - 1986 



o 




STATUS Officers 



PRESIDENT 

GENE RODRIGUEZ 499-6021 

VICE PRESIDENT 

STAN HARRISON 497-4369 

TREASURER 

DAVID LEVY 623-7802 

SECRETARY 

DICK LITCHFIELD 468-6964 

PROGRAM COORDINATOR 

BUCK MADDREY 464-2100 

LIBRARIAN 

CHUCK SARGENT 422-5691 

MEMBERSHIP CHAIRMAN 

BILL WRIGHT 481-0555 

SYSOP 

DOUG BOYNTON 468-6242 

EDITOR 

GENE RODRIGUEZ III 490-2951 

STATUS BBS 

300/1200 

804 - 468-1096 

ADVERTISING RATES : The following rates refer to a one 
month presentation of a given ad, other rates may apply 
to extended presentations. All advertisements must be 
camera ready, and must be delivered to the Editor no 
later than one week prior to publication. Make all 
checks payable to STATUS. 

FULL PAGE 
<5" X 7") $25.00 



BUSINESS CARD 
(3" X 5") $10.00 



Editor’s File 

Some much to talk about 
and such a short space to say 
it in! What to get to first? 
Okay, the guilt meter. 

You may or may not have 
noticed the little circle on 
the front cover, (If not, go 
check it out now) from now 
on that little symbol will be 
there to let you know what 
percentage of this Newsletter 
was derived from outside 
sources... do you feel guilty 
yet? 

This issue marks the 
second anniversary of my 
tenure as editor of this fine 
publication (please hold your 
applause ’til the end) and I 
would like to say that even 
though there have been times 
that I’ve wanted to chuck the 
whole thing, I’m glad I’ve 
held out. I think it’s been 
worth it... 

Now for the really 

exciting stuff! 

For years now. I’ve been 
going through the same 

process every month: col* 

lect/wrangle/mug a few 
articles from members, and 
then off I’d trudge to the 
Newsletter Exchange to spend 
a few painful nights typing 
in some articles to fill out 



the rest of OUR Newsletter. 

I always said to myself: 
"There has got to be a better 
way!" 

Now there is. 

Introducing NewsNET! 
The ATARI Electronic 
Information Network. 
Starting August 4, 1986 

NewsNET will be open to the 
public at 804-490-1348 from 
7:00 pm to 7:00am (EST) Mon- 
Fri, and 24 hours on Sat & 
Sun. This is how it works 
(pay attention all you 
editors, out there): what 

NewsNet will be, is a 
clearing house for Newsletter 
articles from across the 
country (and around the 
globe!), but it can only work 
if everybody helps out. So 
when you’ve put your publica- 
tion to bed for the month, 
pop those files onto NewsNET 
and maybe pick some up for 
yourself for next month. 

Set your modem to ASCII 
and give us a call, NewsNET 
has 20 MEG of storage for 
your submissions... right off 
the bat I can think of two 
advantages: 1) no more 
scurrying around for articles 
and typing your fingers to 
the bone and 2) almost 
guaranteed national 
exposure! Who could ask for 
more... 



one 



TELECOMPUTING 

By Doug Boynton 

Beep. Boop. Hello, 
again, telecommunicators! 
It’s time for another dis- 
course designed to massage 
your gray matter. 

I had intended to flog 
the old "etiquette" horse 
again this month, but 
couldn’t bring myself to 
write anything worth the ink 
it would take to print it 
with. So, moving right 
along, we’ll make this sort 
of a potpourri of little 
bytes this month. 

M The latest from 
CompuServe on the old, "Re- 
quest recorded, one moment 
please" bugaboo is that yes, 
indeed, you ARE charged for 
the time spent staring at a 
blank screen while the big 
mainframes switch you among 
themselves. Customer Service 
had the following advice 
after a five-minute wait to 
get to SIG*ATARI the other 
night: "Call during non-peak 

hours". My response was as 
follows, "If YOUR system is 
overloaded, is that MY prob- 
lem? Shouldn’t you maybe 
cut back on those network TV 
spots to get new subscrib- 
ers?" Still waiting for a 
reply on that one from 
Customer Service. I’m not 



holding my breath. 

M Drop a line to your 
Senator. Specifically, 

Virginia’s Junior Senator, 
Paul Trible. The name of the 
bill we’re talking about here 
is the "Computer Pornography 
and Child Exploitation Act of 
1985" (S. 1305). The senator 
wants to make sure child mol- 
esters don’t use their compu- 
ters to swap information, a 
laudable goal. The senator 
also wants to make sure Bul- 
letin Board Systems are free 
from pornography. You see 
where we’re headed here, 
right? What is pornography? 
If the courts can’t decide, 
can a 15-year-old Sysop? Too 
much legislation pertaining 
to computer communication is 
born of ignorance. Modem 
users are getting a bad rap, 
and lawmakers are ready to 
impose massive restrictions 
on all of us... to halt the 
abuses of a few. Somehow... 
we’ve got to let the lawma- 
kers know there are thousands 
of voters out here who use 
computer communications for 
legitimate business, profess- 
ional, and hobby applica- 
tions. We’re not making 
enough noise. Speak up. 

M It’s fun to watch 
GEnie grow. General Elec- 
tric’s CompuServe alternative 
continues to spread its 



two 



wings; adding new sections 
all the time. The latest 
move pertaining to Atari 
users is the break-up of the 
ATARI Roundtable into 8-BIT 
and ST groups. A wise move; 
beneficial to both groups. 
If you get an ST, be sure to 
start your library here. At 
$4. 95/hour at 1200 baud, 
you’ll save a lot of money 
over the "Request record- 
ed..." company. 

M 2400 Baud. You’re 
going to be hearing more and 
more about it. Now that 
1200 baud modems are under 
$100 in many cases, many 
folks are going to be taking 
a look at 2400 baud. The 
prices are still way, way up 
there, but many businesses 
are already moving to 4800 or 
9600 baud (yes, over the 
phone lines!), and as that 
move continues, 2400 baud 
modems will hit the "used" 
pile, and become available to 
hobbyists at reasonable 
prices. CompuServe and GEnie 
have begun placing 2400 baud 
nodes around the country 
already. 

M I’m not a big fan of 
ANTIC magazine. But you may 
want to take a look at the 
August issue. There are a 
couple of articles dedicated 
to telecomputing this month 
that are worth the price of 



admission; especially if 
you’re thinking of buying a 
new modem, or have bought a 
new modem. 

Next month, Dick Litch- 
field and I will try to put 
together a comparison of 
the modems that claim to be 
"Hayes-Compatible". After 
that... geez, I dunno. I’m 
sort of running low on ideas. 
How about some input from 
you? What would you like to 
see here? Instructional? 
Gossip and rumors? Legisla- 
tive action? Philosophy? 
Unique home-spun humor? Drop 
me a line. 

Is there a Language 
for you on the 
Atari ST? 

By Wilfrod Niepraschk 

Many people have asked 
me what language I use for 
writing programs. This is 
not an easy question to 
answer, but maybe if I de- 
scribe a few of the languages 
available for the ST computer 
your choice will be a little 
easier to make. 

BASIC 

Basic has been around 
for a long time and is cur- 
rently being used by about 
85% of the people who have 
home computers. This lan- 



three 



guage is popular because it 
is very easy to use and it is 
one of the most powerful 
languages available for micro 
computers. Most Basics allow 
you to create screen formats 
and graphics with ease, while 
most other languages require 
you to write your own 
routines. 

Basic is an interpreter, 
therefore it executes much 
slower than most of the other 
languages available. Program 
development is much easier 
with an interpreter since you 
can run a program and see 
instant results. If the pro- 
gram did not meet up to your 
expectations you may modify 
it and run it again without 
having to compile or link it 
each time. This link and 
compile time may take up to 
ten minutes for other 
languages. Basic compilers 
are available for some Basics 
that will take the inter- 
pretive code and compile it 
to object code, therefore 
giving you the speed of 
execution while still making 
it easy to develop programs. 

The ST computer comes 
with ST BASIC. This basic 
has graphic support and most 
other functions normally 
found in that language. ST 
BASIC is similar to Microsoft 
Basic, but programs on an IBM 



PC will not run on the ST 
without major changes. File 
handling and cursor position- 
ing are the biggest problems 
when trying to convert from 
the IBM PC computer. It sure 
would have been nice if ST 
BASIC would have been written 
to be 100% compatible, as 
that would have allowed the 
user to have access to 
thousands of programs. 

ST BASIC is very slow 
and clumsy to use. The 
editor is the worst I have 
ever seen and the windows 
constantly get in my way. 
The GOTOXY function does 
not appear to be working 
properly all of the time. I 
have always been a great fan 
of BASIC but at the present I 
do not recommend using ST 
BASIC because of it’s hostile 
environment. 

Other Basics are avail- 
able, but I would look at 
them very carefully before 
you spend your hard earned 
cash. 

PASCAL 

Pascal is used by about 
30% of the programmers. It 
is very popular in univers- 
ities as a teaching language. 
Pascal forces the programmer 
to write programs that are 
well structured. Since 

Pascal is a compiler the 



four 



programs written in this 
language will execute much 
faster than programs written 
in ST BASIC. Pascal requires 
a lot of extensions to make 
it suitable for writing 
business applications. 

I purchased Personal 
Pascal from Optimized Systems 
Software Inc. (OSS). OSS has 
always put out fine products 
and their Personal Pascal 
adds just one more to their 
list. It features many 
extensions. String exten- 
sions are similar to the ones 
used in TURBO PASCAL from 
Borland. This package is 
' very user friendly and it is 
the easiest user interface I 
have ever seen on any 
computer system. Once your 
program is written using the 
full screen editor the user 
needs only press a function 
key to save, compile and link 
that program. If an error is 
encountered during the 
compile, you may abort, con- 
tinue, or return to the 
editor. If the last option 
was chosen then your file is 
automatically loaded and the 
cursor placed where the error 
occurred. 

I found the editor very 
pleasing to use and wish that 
OSS would make it available 
as a separate item. The GEM 
interface is very easy to 



use. OSS decided to create 
their own GEM interface and 
they have done an exellent 
job of making it as painless 
as possible. The documenta- 
tion is pretty good but the 
lack of an index makes it 
hard to find where everything 
is. I recommend this product 
to anyone that wants to write 
programs using GEM. You can 
write a nice looking program 
in very little time. 

C 

C is used by about 20% of 
the programmers. C is 
becoming very popular and 
many of the big applications 
are written in C. It is a 
very powerful and well- 
structured language that 
produces very compact object 
code. It is usually harder 
to learn C than Pascal or 
Basic and the source code may 
be a little harder to 
understand. You can change 
the name of keywords through 
the DEFINE statement, making 
the source almost impossible 
to read by someone not 
familiar with your concept. 

I purchased the ATARI 
DEVELOPMENT KIT for $300 
because it was the only one 
available at the time. This 
package included the Alcyon C 
from Digital Research. I was 
very disappointed with this 
product. While there was 



five 



about 1500 pages of documen- 
tation, it was almost impos- 
sible to find what you were 
looking for. The documenta- 
tion talked more about the 
IBM PC than the ATARI ST. The 
user interface is nonexistent 
and compile and link time are 
about 10 minutes when using a 
floppy disk drive. There 
were also numerous bugs, but 
most of those have now been 
corrected. The only good 
thing from this package is 
that I am now a registered 
Atari Developer which gives 
me access to their SIG on 
CompuServe. There are other 
C packages available for the 
ST and the LATTICE C and 
MEGAMAX C have both had 
favorable reviews. 

OTHERS 

I have been told by a 
friend that the Modula 2 
package from TDI is an excel- 
lent product. I have not had 
a chance to review this pack- 
age, but I really like Modula 
2. It is basically a better 
version of Pascal since it 
was developed by the same 
person. Writing programs in 
Assembly language can be fun, 
but don’t expect to write too 
many applications since it 
takes much longer to write 
code in. It also is much 
harder to transport Assembly 
code to another system. I 
use Assembly language only if 



speed is of great importance 
like in a sort program. 

Happy News 

By Roily Herman 

WAND Newsletter: June, 1986 

The long awaited Happy 
Enhancement 7.0 has finally 
arrived. I waited a year 
and a half, but it was worth 
it. I had ordered and paid 
for the upgrade chip and disk 
for my 810 drive to make it 
compatible with the 1050 
Happy, and to make the drives 
able to backup the latest 
software. Here is my report: 

Installing the chip in 
the 810 was quite simple. It 
required opening up the drive 
and removing the side board. 
The metal shield on the side- 
board had to be opened, the 
old Happy chip removed, and 
the new chip inserted in its 
place. Put everything back 
together, and that is all 
there is to it. 

The chip and the Rev. 
7.0 made the drives complete- 
ly compatible using the Happy 
program. The same Rev. 7.0 
disk works for both the 1050 
and the 810. The 1050 did not 
need any new hardware. The 
multidrive option is really 
fantastic. It is possible to 
make two backup copies faster 



SIX 



make two backup copies faster 
than it previously took to 
make one. I have not had a 
chance to try out all the 
modes and parameters, but so 
far I was able to backup 
SynCalc, Synfile+, and 
Scanalyser which defied 
copying previously. The 
manual is an upgrade of the 
previous manual. Most of the 
material is the same, with 
the new Rev. 7.0 instructions 
added. I have always found 
the Happy manuals a little 
difficult to read, but the 
program is menu driven and 
very easy to use. 

The Happy Enhancement 
is not only the best backup 
system, it is, in reality, 
the only one. There was a 
runner up called the Archiver 
which was fairly useful. 
However, the Archiver is now 
obsolete, and out of produc- 
tion. Another current system, 
the Duplicator, is so bad, so 
full of bugs, and lacking in 
backup ability that it should 
not even be considered. 

Richard Adams, (younger 
brother of Scott Adams, of 
adventure game fame) is the 
mastermind behind the Happy 
hardware and software, He has 
kept his system current with 
repeated upgrades so that if 
new protection schemes are 
devised, he figures out ways 



to make the backups. In his 
manual, he states, "there is 
no lock that a mortal can 
make that another mortal 
cannot create the key 
to, M . He also emphasiz- 

es that the very powerful 
Happy system is to be used to 
make backups only for per- 
sonal use of executable Atari 
programs and not for Piracy. 

For those that do not 
already have the Happy 

Enhancement, and are contem- 
plating buying it, the 
installation involves insert- 
ing a whole little daughter 
board, but it does not 
require any soldering, and is 
fairly easy to do. An added 
advantage with the 1050 drive 
is that the drive will now 
have true double density 
capability, as well as the 

single and enhanced densi- 

ties. 

The Happy Enhancement 
for the 810 or 1050 sells for 
$149.95. It is not available 

for the Indus, Trak, Percom 
or other third party drives. 
If you have an Atari drive, 
and need backups, then get 
HAPPY!! 




seven 



Upgrade Your 
Power Strip For 
Surge Protection 

By Jim Parks 

A multiple outlet power 
strip is one accessory that 
is common to almost every 
computer enthusiast, and by 
following the simple instruc- 
tions here, you can upgrade 
your power strip to include 
surge protection that will 
equal those bought commerc- 
ially. 

The secret of surge 
protection is the Metal Oxide 
Varistor (or MOV for short). 
This device provides excel- 
lent protection against 



spikes and over voltages. 
Simply stated, once the 
voltage exceeds the MOV’s 
rating, the excess voltage is 
shorted to ground. 

To upgrade your power 
strip, start by unplugging 
and disassembling the case of 
your strip: most are secured 
with screws or rivets. 
Riveted cases may be drilled 
and later secured with sheet 
metal screws. At the point 
where the cord enters the 
case, the outer insulation of 
the cord should be skinned 
back exposing the black, 
white and green wires 
attached to the outlets. 
Scrape off a little insula- 




eight 




tion from each of the three 
wires (carefully, don’t cut 
the wires in two) and lay the 
power strip aside. 

NOTE: The MOV’s leads 
are not insulated, so plastic 
tubing or heat shrink 
tubing must be used on any 
exposed wires. 

Study the diagram in 
Fig. 1 and solder the MOVs to 
the wires as shown. Then, 
with electrical tape, cover 
any bare wires and connec- 
tions not protected by insul- 
ation. Carefully re-assemble 
the power strip so as to 
avoid pinching any wires. 
Your project is now complete, 
and you can enjoy the same 
peace of mind as you would 
with a commercially protected 
power strip. 

PARTS LIST 

3-130 Volt Metal Oxide 
Varistor’s (Radio Shack 276- 
571 or equiv.) 

Heat Shrink Tubing 

Electrical Tape 




ACTION! 

By Mike Sawley 

SLCC Journal: July, 1986 

The Action! language by 
Optimized Systems Software is 
a non-portable language that 
generates very fast object 
code for the Atari 800 and 
800XL home computers. It is 
the fastest high level 
language available for these 
machines in both compilation 
and execution speed. It runs 
100 times faster than Atari 
BASIC and executes more than 
twice as fast as Kyan Pascal. 

Compilation time in 
Action! compared to Kyan 
Pascal is many times faster 
for several reasons. The 
Pascal compiler is large and 
requires relatively long load 
time, whereas Action! is 
already present on a ROM 
cartridge. Pascal makes type 
checks on 99% of the variable 
names and type declarations, 
while Action! guarantees type 
compatibility among its 
standard predefined types; no 
further type checking is 
done. Kyan Pascal uses a two 
pass compiler and Action! 
does it in one. 

The design of the 
Action! system allows 
compilation from memory to 
memory, memory to disk and 
disk to memory while Kyan 



nine 




Pascal compiles only from 
disk to disk due to the large 
size of the compiler. 
Action! even allows two 
different source codes 

(programs or subroutines) to 
reside in memory and can 
compile and run either from 
the monitor without building 
entire programs around them. 

Many of the features of 
the prominent high level 
languages are found in 
Action! such as block 

structure, parameter passing, 

IF-THEN-ELSE nesting, record 
declaration and all of the 
high level loop constructs 
(no GOTO available!). 
Generally, if the feature 

contributed to the concept of 
structured programing while 
not slowing the execution of 
the object code (could be 
implemented with a minimum 
of output code)... the 
feature was put in. Other 
features must be defined if 
they are required. 

It has been said that 
the construction of the 
Action! language was explic- 
itly designed to optimize the 
6502 instruction set and that 
is the reason for its fast 
execution speeds. That must 
be why the object code 
generated by Action! reads 
like that of a 6502 assembly 
language programmer (without 



the comments, of course!). 

One thing that I found 
very discouraging was that 
recursion does not return 
popped values. Parameters 
are overwritten if called by 
the same subroutine. This 
is because a block of memory 
is used explicitly for vari- 
ables and the names of the 
callers. The one pass 
compilation is another factor 
in this limitation. Recur- 
sion can be simulated, so I 
am told, and I am looking for 
a demonstration of this 
usef ul technique. Action! 
uses only the 256 byte 
hardware stack provided for 
the 6502 microprocessor to 
save return addresses from 
procedure and function calls 
during the run. While this 
is a factor in reducing the 
speed of execution, some of 
the utility of the language 
has been compromised. 

The standard types 
supported are: BYTE (8-bit), 
CARD (16-bit used as address- 
es or large positive values), 
INT (-32768 - 32767), CHAR 
(256 characters in the set) 
and POINTER (for passing by 
reference etc.). Any 
coercions desired can be made 
between any of these standard 
types even though the lengths 
vary between 8 and 16 bits. 
FLOAT is an option which is 






ten 





BEST 

ELECTRONICS 



"ATARI OWNER’S BEST FRIEND" 



800 Mother Board (Fully Populated) S20.00 

16K RAM Board (Fully Populated) $15.00 



Atari 9 Volt AC Power Supplies $12.00 

1050 Transports $75.00 

Atari CX87 Modem Cable (Hayes Type) $12.00 

Centronics Printer Cable (Epson, etc.) $15.00 

Atari 3 Ft. I/O Cable $9.00 



BEST ELECTRONICS 
2021 The Alameda, Suite 290 
San Jose, CA 95126 
(408) 243-6950 



(804) 499-5057 



Printing and Rubber Stamp 

• COMPLETE ART DEPARTMENT 

• PHOTO-TYPESETTING • DESIGN CAPABILITIES 

• COMPLETE PRINTING SERVICE 

• LETTERPRESS • NUMBERING • EMBOSSING 

• RUBBER STAMPS 

• MAILING SERVICE 

PICK UP AND DELIVERY SERVICE 
248 Jersey Avenue • Virginia Beach, Virginia 23462 





eleven 




not included in the basic 
language but can be added at 
extra cost. This means that 
division truncates the 
decimal part. ARRAY is a 
standard structure and always 
numbers from 0 to n-1. It 
can contain any of the 
standard types. A special 
TYPE declaration can be made 
to declare records of 
standard types. But arrays of 
records must be implemented 
using a template which is 
moved over a larger array 
calculated in advance by 
multiplying the record size 
(in bytes) times the number 
of records. In this case, 
aliasing is a necessary 
evil. Dynamic array length 
declaration may not be done, 
but array bounds are not 
checked during execution. In 
fact, array length need not 
be specified at all. 
However, the user must insure 
that data does not collide 
with the program if this 
option is used. 

Assignment in the type' 
declaration is allowed. 
However, if the value is not 
enclosed in square brackets, 
the assignment is assumed to 
be binding of an address to 
the variable name itself. 
Also, arrays may be bound to 
any feasible starting address 
by the programer using the 
same technique. Since 



overflow is not checked, any 
values assigned during 
compilation or execution will 
be made modulo 256 or 65536 
depending on the type of the 
variable being assigned to. 

Overloading of operators 
is generally not done, but 
Action! has some other 
strange peculiarities. There 
are some operations which 
have more than one symbol 
to mean the same thing! "Not 
Equal" can be represented by 
either <> or #. "And" can be 
either AND or &. "Or" either 
OR or %. "Exclusive-Or" 
either XOR or !. And BYTE is 
a CHAR is a BYTE? All of 
this interchangeability is 
logical, but strange when the 
size of the language was 
originally limited because of 
speed considerations. 

Procedures and functions 
that return values are an 
important part of the 
language. Their form is 
somewhat similar to Pascal 
except that nesting of them 
is not allowed. Any subrou- 
tine calling another must 
call above due to the one 
pass restriction. The 
reserved word RETURN is used 
at the bottom of procedures 
and functions to indicate 
their termination. A missing 
RETURN is not a compiler 
error. The BEGIN, END and 



twelve 



semicolon are not used as 
delimiters. Instead, an EOLN 
separates each line logical- 
ly. The semicolon is used, 
as in Assembly Language, to 
indicate that a comment 
follows. 

Eight parameters 
maximum may be passed to a 
subroutine. This is a 
violation of the "Zero-One- 
Infinity" Rule, but micro- 
computers do have limita- 
tions. Also, there is a 
restriction to not use 
channel 7 for input/output as 
that is reserved for the 
keyboard only by the Action! 
system. 

Over all, the language 
is designed for the use of 
experienced programmers who 
need the flexibility to 
manipulate the operating 
system and the ability to 
write fast, readable code. 
Then, the full capability of 
the real-time graphics on the 
8-bit machine can be 
realized. 

Educational Computing 
Graphics 

By Bob Moss 

BAAUG Newsletter: July, 1986 

When we bought our 
ATARI 800 more than four 
years ago, one of the major 



factors was the excellent 
graphics and color provided 
by the ATARI. This is still 
true. Even the old 8-bit 
ATARI computers have better 
graphics and color capability 
than the IBM PC and APPLE 
Macintosh. A major selling 
point of the Amiga and the 
ATARI ST series computers is 
the outstanding graphics. 

Graphics programs 
available for micro computers 
range from color doodling to 
sophisticated computer aided 
design. There are many 
applications available 
costing under $100. My wife 
questions the educational 
value for children of most 
graphics programs, but I ^ook 
at them as similar to basic 
art and design classes which 
allow a wide range of exper- 
imentation with composition 
and the relationship between 
elements. Which programs and 
input method is best depends 
on the abilities and inter- 
ests of the child as well as 
the features of the program. 

There are five ways to 
use graphic programs: mouse, 
joystick, graphics pad, light 
pen and keyboard. Since I am 
limiting this discussion to 
8-bit ATARIs, I will exclude 
mouse input systems. One of 
the simplest joystick 
controlled programs is Video 



thirteen 



Easel. Drawing is simple, 
almost like sketching or 
doodling. Younger children 
seem to like this, because 
they can make pictures 
easily. There are a variety 
of effects, colors and 
patterns possible, and good 
hand-eye coordination is not 
needed. Paint is another 
excellent graphics program 
for preschoolers and young 
children. A variety of 
colors and patterns is 
possible, and the techniques 
are easy for young children 
to learn. Fun With Art is a 
joystick controlled program 
similar in design to Paint. 
It offers a variety of 
features, such as setting 
colors to overwrite or be 
overwritten by other colors 
while drawing. Our experien- 
ce is that it was too complex 
for children under 7 or 8 to 
really enjoy, though it has 
many nice features. 

Micropainter is control- 
led by both joystick and 
keyboard. This program is 
more sophisticated, and 
offers more variety and 
interest. It also requires 
more skill and understanding 
of a variety of commands. 
Widths of lines can be 
changed, shapes can be drawn 
easily, there are fill and 
paint functions and colors 
and tints can be varied. It 



also is more difficult for 
younger children to under- 
stand all of the features, 
and to read and follow the 
directions. The added 
features of programs such as 
this offer children in the 7 
to 10 age group an opportun- 
ity to experiment with art 
and graphics at a comfortable 
level. Graphics Magician is 
a rather sophisticated 
program which is joystick 
controlled with some keyboard 
commands. One interesting 
feature is the ability to mix 
text and graphics; another is 
that the memory stores the 
drawing sequence, not the 
final drawing, so that 
copying or reviewing the 
drawing recreates the actions 
of executing the drawing. 
This program would be used 
more effectively by older 
children, perhaps 10 to 16 
year olds. All of these 
programs allow a wide range 
of colors and tints, drawing 
with different width lines, 
making repeatable geometric 
figures, storing and loading 
pictures from a screen dump 
and editing or changing the 
drawing on the screen. These 
programs are similar in 
concept and operation, and 
all have excellent features, 
but they probably will not be 
equally successful in appeal- 
ing to younger children. 
All of them should be tried 



fourteen 



by the child before buying, 
if at all possible. 

We have two programs 
which use light pens: Atari- 
graphics and Koala lightpen. 
Both programs have pop-up 
menus, and have features 
similar to Paint or Fun With 
Art. Drawing directly on the 
screen is more natural than 
using a joystick or mouse, 
but it also limits the user 
mostly to preselected 
commands and graphic entry 
mode. We found them more of 
interest to older children, 8 
to 12, than to preschoolers 
or 1st graders. I prefer the 
Koala lightpen, because the 
commands are more graphically 
described on the screen, and 
are easier to understand and 
apply than Atarigraphics. It 
takes some dexterity to use 
these programs, though young 
children can master the most 
of the commands and features 
after 1 or 2 lessons. 

Graphics pads allow the 
user to draw on a flat 
surface and have the drawing 
reproduced on a screen to be 
saved, stored or shown as 
artwork. The 2 major 
graphics pads for the ATARI 
are Koala and Chalkboard. 
Koala has a smaller surface 
area. It has good graphics 
software, similar in many 
ways to the Koala lightpen 



program. The major disadvan- 
tage is that there are only a 
few programs for the 400/800 
computers. Also, ofhe small 
surface area may not be large 
enough for younger, less 
coordinated children. Koala 
has not been new ATARI 
programs for the Koala pad 
recently. Chalkboard is a 
much larger pad, making it 
more forgiving of drawing 
errors. There are a number 
of good programs available 
for Chalkboard. Our pre- 
schoolers and younger 
children actually prefer some 
of the non-graphic programs, 
such as Bearjam and Music 
Maestro rather than the 
Microillustrator graphics 
program, which is very 
similar to the Koala 
program. Leo’s ’Lectric 
Paintbrush is a much better 
graphics program for younger 
children. The major problem 
with Chalkboard is that it 
has serious financial 
problems, has been in Chapter 
11 bankruptcy since 1985, and 
may not be available. 

A good graphics program 
is an excellent way to 
introduce younger children to 
computers. Some type of 
graphics program should be 
part of every ATARI educa- 
tional software library. 



fifteen 




New Product Info 

Antic Publishing Inc., c 1986 
Reprinted By Permission 

[Editor’s Note: All right, 
I’ve succumbed to the pres- 
sure I’ve felt from other 
Newsletters to print some- 
thing about the summer CES, 
so here it is...] 

Artworx is showing its 
bridge programs for both 8- 
bit and ST, and Hole-in-One 
Golf for the ST. They also 
have a new 8-bit program 
called Peggammon... 

Omnitrend: Universe II 
for the ST... 

First Star Software: the 
company that made Spy vs. Spy 
and Boulder Dash for the 8- 
bits, is coming out with 
Comic Strip Maker, a graphics 
program for the ST... 

ICD: some exciting 8-bit 
hardware, including the ICD 
Multi I/O Board, a new multi- 
use I/O board that plugs into 
the parallel port... 

MicroProse: ST version 
of Silent Service... 

Zobian Controls: The 
Rat, a mouse for 8-bit Atari 
computers... 



Batteries Included: 
Thunder, a real-time spelling 
checker, and a new version of 
PaperClip for the 8-bit with 
Spellpack... 

Quickview: Software 
author Paul Heckel showed his 
Zoomracks ST database pro- 
gram... 

Covox: Voice Master, 
Atari 8-bit voice recognition 
software... 

Spinnaker: an extensive 
line of 8 and 16-bit educa- 
tional and adventure game 
products... 

Avila Associates: Make 
it Move, an ST graphics ani- 
mation program, and a gamb- 
ling tutorial currently cal- 
led Casino Craps... 

Britannica Learning: a 
series of educational pro- 
grams for the 8-bit 
machines... 

OSS: 8-bit and 16-bit 
programmer’s tools... 

[I guess that hits the 
high points, besides: it 

filled up the space left by 
our President who was unable 
to submit his monthly dose of 
wit, humor and insight due to 
the press of business... Ed.] 



sixteen 



Opinions expressed in this publication are those 
of the individual authors and do not necessarily 
express or reflect the opinions of the Souths ide 
Tidewater Atari Technical Users Society (STATUS). Some 
material contained herein may have been taken from 
Bulletin Board Systems and/or Newsletters of other 
groups and should not be construed as fact. 

The material herein may be copied freely provided 
that full credit is given to the original author and 
the Souths ide Tidewater Atari Technical Users Society. 
STATUS is in no way affiliated with ATARI Corp. 

Please address all Newsletter correspondence to: 

STATUS 

Newsletter Exchange 
4836 Honeygrove Road 
Virginia Beach , VA 23455 
(804) 499-6021 

Meet i ngs : STATUS meetings are held on the first 
and third Thursdays of the month at the 7- UP Bottling 
Company, 5700 Ward Avenue, in Virginia Beach at 7:30 
p.m. All interested parties are welcome to attend. 

Newsletter Articles: 

Submitted articles are preferred as disk text 
files, but will be gratefully accepted as hard copy 
(including handwriting) if you do not have a disk 
drive. If you have a modem, you can upload your 
articles to the Editor by calling the STATUS BBS at 
468-1096. Articles may be submitted at any time, but 
will probably not make that month's Newsletter if 
submitted less than one week prior to the first 
meeting of the month. 



to 



< ro 
*-•00 • — 
n w o 
*0 o-~ 



*—*• cn 
zs zxi ro 

a* CD => 




*/ «n o 
n 50 o* 




KO • 
CW 



c_n 

cn 





m • 







ro 










