lie Page 1 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Apple lie Owner's Manual 

Chapter 1: Meet Your Apple lie 

Two words that get thrown around a lot in conversations about computers are hardware and 
software. 

Hardware refers to the computer, the disk drive, the monitor, and any other piece of equipment 
you can see, touch, and connect to your computer. The individual hardware components that you 
attach to your computer are called peripheral devices (because they are peripheral to the 
computer itself). Peripheral device is a mouthful, so the expression is usually shortened to 
device or peripheral . 

Software refers to the instructions, called programs, that tell the computer what to do. You 
can learn to write programs yourself, or you can buy programs ready-made on every subject from 
planning investments to keeping track of students' grades. 

Programs are recorded on disks. That's why a disk drive is an indispensible part of your 
computer system it loads programs from disks into the computer, and it stores information on 
disks so you can retrieve it later. 

In a few minutes you're going to use a program called Apple Presents the Apple lie: An 
Introduction to learn about the computer, but first you've got to get your computer system set 
up. 

Already Set Up? 

If you've already got your monitor and disk drive connected to your Apple lie, you can skip 
directly to Chapter 2 . 

Setting Up Your Computer System 

If you haven't done so already, unpack your computer and make sure you've got everything. 

Plugging In the Power Cord 

Before you even think about plugging anything into your Apple lie, make sure the computer power 
switch is turned off. The power switch is in the right corner as you face the back of the 
machine. 

Plug the power cable into the Apple lie. Eventually you'll be plugging the other end of the 
power cord into a three-hole, grounded outlet, but as a safety precaution, leave it unplugged 
until you finish connecting peripheral devices to your Apple lie. 

Do not plug in your Apple lie power cord until you've read the important safety instructions 
later in this chapter. 

Important ! 

Your Apple lie and its peripheral devices were FCC-certified under test conditions that include 
use of shielded cables and connectors between system components. It is important that you use 
shielded cables and connectors to reduce the possibility of causing interference to radio, 
television, and other electronic devices. 



lie Page 2 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Connecting a Monitor 

Plug one end of the monitor cable into the Apple lie's monitor outlet on the far left as you 
face the back of your computer. You can tell it's a monitor outlet because it's got a monitor 
symbol right above it. Plug the other end of the monitor cable into the back of the monitor. 

Plug the monitor power cable into a three-hole, grounded outlet. 

Eventually you'll want to set your monitor on top of your Apple lie, but for now, leave it on 
the desk beside your computer so you'll be able to remove the Apple lie cover to install other 
devices. 

Using a Television Set as a Monitor: 

If you plan to use a television set as a monitor, you'll need a radio frequency (RF) modulator. 
An RF modulator, available from your Apple dealer, modifies signals from the computer so your 
TV can tune them in. RF modulators come with instructions that explain how to install them. 

Inside Connections 

As you may have noticed, there is no disk drive symbol on the back of the Apple lie. That's 
because disk drives, and lots of other peripheral devices, come with special interface cards 
designed to plug into slots inside the computer case. Before you can connect your disk drive, 
you'll need to pop the top of your Apple lie. 

Cards : 

The disk drive's interface card is called a controller card. You may also hear the term 

peripheral card, or just plain card. 

Popping the Top 

Wrap your fingers under the tabs that project from the back of the computer cover and pull up 
firmly until the fasteners pop. Slide the cover back, away from the keyboard, then lift it off 
and set it aside. 

Try not to be dazzled by all the chips and resistors inside the case while you direct your 
attention to the row of slots along the rear of the main circuit board. The main circuit board 
is the sheet of green plastic that lines the bottom of the computer case. The slots are 
numbered from 1 to 7 (from left to right). You'll be putting the disk drive controller card in 
slot 6. 

Important: 

Make sure the tiny bulb labeled POWER ON to the left of slot 1 is off. If it is lit up, turn 
off the computer's power switch and unplug the Apple lie power cord before you do anything 
else. 

Connecting a Disk Drive 

This section shows you how to connect an Apple DuoDisk drive to your Apple lie. 



lie Page 3 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Other Disk Drives: 

If you have a different type of disk drive, install it according to the instructions that came 
with it. 

Remove the plastic insert that covers opening 2 on the back panel of the computer by reaching 
inside the computer case and pushing down and out on the tab that projects from the plastic 
insert. 

Hold the disk drive controller card over slot 6 so that the bare side of the card is facing the 
power supply (the big metal box on the left) . Gently but firmly push the gold fingers on the 
card's edge into slot 6, rear edge first. 

Then push the front edge down and gently rock the card from back to front until it is level and 
firmly seated. Don't touch the gold fingers when you handle the card. (Oil from your fingers 
could weaken the connection between the card and the computer.) 

Hold the D-shaped connector (on the end of the cable extending from the disk drive controller 
card) up to the inside opening in the back panel. Anchor the connector to the back panel using 
the two screws and the wrench that came with the disk drive. 

Connect one end of the disk drive cable to the connector now visible through the opening in the 
back panel of the computer. Make sure the D-shapes are lined up the same way on both 
connectors . 

Then tighten the retaining screws with a small standard screwdriver. 

Connect the other end of the disk drive cable to the outlet on the back of the disk drive. 

Then tighten the retaining screws . 

Attach the drive 1 label that came with your DuoDisk to the recess on the left. Attach the 
drive 2 label to the recess on the right. 

Connecting an Auxiliary Memory Card 

In addition to the seven slots along the rear of the main circuit board there is a special slot 
on the left side of the circuit board labeled AUX. CONNECTOR, short for auxiliary connector. 
That slot is reserved for cards that increase the Apple lie's memory and video capabilities 
like the 80-Column Text Card, the Extended 80-Column Text Card, the Extended 80-Column 
Text/AppleColor Adaptor Card, and other RAM cards. 

An 80-Column Text Card makes it possible for the Apple lie to display 80 characters per line 
instead of the standard 40 characters per line. An Extended 80-Column Text Card gives you the 
80-character-per-line display plus additional memory. (You'll learn all about memory in 
Chapter 4, but essentially, having more memory makes it possible for you to use more 
sophisticated programs on your Apple lie.) An Extended 80-Column Text/AppleColor Adaptor Card 
gives you the 80 characters per line, the extra memory, and allows you to connect an RGB color 
monitor to your Apple lie. 

If you have one of these cards, install it in the AUX. CONNECTOR slot. 

Be sure that the bare side of the card faces the power supply (the metal box to the left of the 
AUX. CONNECTOR slot). 



lie Page 4 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Gently push the gold fingers on the card's edge into the AUX. CONNECTOR slot, rear edge first. 
Then push the front edge down and gently rock the card from back to front until it is level and 
firmly seated. Don't touch the gold fingers when you handle the card. 

Replacing the Apple lie Cover 

When you finish connecting your disk drive (and 80-column card, if you have one), put the cover 
back on the computer. When you've got the cover in place, press down firmly on the back 
corners until you hear the fasteners pop shut on both sides. 

Important Safety Instructions 

You're almost ready to plug in your Apple lie and get started, but first read these important 
safety instructions. 

This equipment is intended to be electrically grounded. Your Apple lie is equipped with a 

three-wire grounding plug a plug having a third (grounding) pin. This plug will fit only a 

grounding-type AC outlet. This is a safety feature. If you are unable to insert the plug into 

the outlet, contact a licensed electrician to replace the outlet with a properly grounded 

outlet. 

Do not defeat the purpose of the grounding plug! 

For your own safety and the safety of your equipment, always take the following precautions: 

Be sure the power plug is disconnected (disconnect by pulling the plug, not the cord) 

Whenever you remove the cover and as long as the cover is off; 

If the power cord or plug is frayed or otherwise damaged; 

If anything is spilled into the case; 

If your Apple lie is exposed to rain or any other excess moisture; 

If it has been dropped or if the case has been otherwise damaged; 

If you suspect that your computer needs servicing or repair; 

Whenever you clean the case (use only the recommended procedure given below) . 

Be sure that you always do the following: 

Keep your Apple lie away from sources of liquids, such as wash basins, bathtubs, shower stalls, 
and so on. 

Keep it protected from damp or wet weather, such as rain, snow, and so on. 

Read all the installation instructions carefully before you plug in the product to a wall 
socket. 

Keep these instructions handy for reference by you and others. 

Follow all instructions and warnings dealing with the Apple lie. 

Electrical equipment may be hazardous if misused. Operation of this product, or similar 
products, must always be supervised by an adult. Do not allow children access to the interior 
of any electrical product and do not permit them to handle any cables . 



lie Page 5 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

To clean the case, do the following: 

Disconnect the power plug. (Pull the plug, not the cord.) 

Use a water-damp, clean, soft cloth. Wipe the surfaces lightly, but do not wipe the screen of 
the monitor. For cleaning the monitor screen, use only the special cloth provided and do not 
moisten it. 

Plug In the Apple lie Power Cord 

Now that you've read the safety instructions, you can plug in the Apple lie power cord, but 
don ' t turn on the power yet . 

Runaway Disk Drive: 

At this point your computer power switch should still be off. If you jumped the gun and turned 
the Apple lie power switch on without the right kind of disk in the disk drive, you've got a 
runaway disk drive on your hands. You can stop the whirring disk drive by holding down CONTROL 
while you press RESET. When the whirring stops, turn off the power and follow the start up 
instructions in the next section. (You could have stopped the disk drive just by turning off 
the power, but for reasons you'll understand later, it's not a good habit to turn off the 
computer while the disk drive is in gear. If you stopped it that way this time, don't panic. 
It's only a problem when there's a disk in the disk drive.) 

Connecting Other Peripheral Devices 

Once you've stuck your first card in a slot, and learned how to anchor cable connectors to the 
back panel of the Apple lie, installing other devices is a snap. Just follow the installation 
instructions that come with your printer, mouse, or other peripheral device, and keep these 
general installation rules in mind: 

Make sure the computer's power is off and that the power cord is unplugged before connecting 
any device to your Apple lie. 

Make sure the bare side of the card faces the power supply (the big metal box on the left side 
of the circuit board) . 

Install cards by rocking the card from back to front and not from side to side. Press down 
firmly, but don't force it. Don't touch the gold fingers on the bottom of the card. 

Put the card in the recommended slot. Unless the device's manual tells you otherwise. 

When you're joining cables, make sure the pins on one connector line up with the holes on the 
other connector. If you aren't careful, you could bend a pin or force a pin into the wrong 
opening and damage the connector, the peripheral, or even the computer. 

Avoid putting a card in slot 3 if you have a card in the AUX. CONNECTOR slot. Slot 3 was the 
80-column card slot in earlier models of the Apple II and, for purposes of software 
compatibility, a card in slot 3 will override a card in the AUX. CONNECTOR slot. 

Need More Power? 



lie Page 6 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Many devices, including printers, monitors, and modems need to be plugged into three-hole, 
grounded outlets. If you have more than two devices that need to be plugged into the wall, you 
should get a power strip. A power strip, available at any electronics store, is like a wall 
socket with four to eight outlets. Many power strips have an ON/OFF switch, so you can turn 
all your devices on and off with one switch. 

Stacking Peripherals 

The Apple lie and Apple peripherals are designed to take up the smallest possible amount of 
desk space. You might want to put the DuoDisk on top of the Apple lie and the monitor on top 
of the DuoDisk. 

Chapter 1 Summary 

Hardware refers to the computer, disk drive, monitor, and other peripheral devices. 

Software refers to the instructions, called programs, that tell the computer what to do. 
Programs are recorded on disks. 

Peripheral devices are things, like printers, that you can connect to your computer. 

General Installation Tips 

Remember these tips when installing peripherals: 

Make sure the Apple lie power is off and that the power cord is unplugged. 

Make sure the bare side of peripheral cards face the power supply. 

Install cards by rocking them back to front. Don't touch the gold fingers on the bottom of the 
card. 

Put cards in their recommended slots (printer card in slot 1, modem card in slot 2, mouse card 
in slot 4, ProFile card in slot 5, disk drive card in slot 6, co-processor card in slot 7, 
80-column card in AUX. CONNECTOR slot). 

Make sure the pins on one connector line up with the holes on the other connector. 



Chapter 2 : Getting Started 

The best way to learn about the Apple lie is to start using it. So look for the disk labeled 
An Introduction. This program will give you practice using the keyboard, and will teach you 
some computer concepts and procedures common to hundreds of other Apple lie programs. 

Starting Up An Introduction 

Follow these steps for starting up An Introduction: 

Open drive 1 by pushing in on the latch. The disk drive door will pop up. If you find a 
cardboard insert inside, remove and discard it. (While you're at it, check drive 2 for a 
cardboard insert and discard it too.) From now on, the only thing you should put in your disk 
drive is a disk and only one disk at a time. 



lie Page 7 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Which Is Drive 1? 

On a DuoDisk, drive 1 is the drive on the left. If you have two or more Disk II disk drives, 
drive 1 is the disk drive connected to the set of pins labeled DRIVE 1 on the controller card 
in slot 6 inside the Apple lie case. 

Put the disk into the disk drive. Hold the disk by the label. Make sure the An Introduction 
label is facing up, and that the label is the last part of the disk to enter the disk drive. 

When the disk is all the way inside, push down on the latch until you hear it click shut. This 
step is important. If you forget to close the disk drive door, the program won't run. 

Turn on the monitor (or TV) power switch. 

Reach around the left side of the computer and find the power switch in the lower-left corner. 
Press the upper half of the switch to turn on the power. (The first time you do this, you may 
have to crane your neck and look for the power switch, but eventually you'll learn to do it by 
touch. ) 

When you turn on the power, several things will happen at once: 

You'll hear a beep. 

The power light (on the bottom row of the keyboard) will light up. 

The light on the disk drive will light up. 

You'll hear a whirring sound from the disk drive. 

What' s Going On? 

Every time you turn on the power, your Apple lie will check drive 1 for a program disk (a disk 
with instructions telling it what to do). If it finds a program disk in drive 1, it copies the 
program into the memory of the computer and starts carrying out the instructions in that 
program one by one. In this case, the program is an educational one. An Introduction, but the 
start up procedure is the same no matter what program you're using. 

Troubleshooting 

You'll find a complete troubleshooting guide at the end of this manual, but here are some 
common problems in starting up. 

No sound from the disk drive. 

Turn off the power and make sure your disk drive is connected according to the instructions in 
Chapter 1 . 

No picture on the screen. 

Try adjusting the contrast knob on your monitor. If that's not the problem, make sure your 
monitor is connected to your Apple lie, that your monitor is turned on, and that your monitor 
is plugged in. 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 8 of 74 



Power light on keyboard doesn't come on. 

Make sure your Apple lie is plugged in. If you're using a power strip, make sure the power 
strip is plugged in and turned on. 

Wrong disk drive starts whirring. 

The disk drive that whirs when you turn on the power is drive 1. Turn off the power, put An 
Introduction in drive 1 and start again. 



Disk drive won't stop whirring. 

Stop the disk drive by pressing CONTROL-RESET, turn off the power, put the disk labeled An 
Introduction in drive 1, and start again. 



You get the message: /vO ERROR. 

Make sure you've got the right disk (An Introduction) in drive 1. If that's not the problem, 
turn off the power and make sure your disk drive is connected properly, and start again. 

Now take An Introduction out of the disk drive and put it back in its envelope for safekeeping, 
but leave your computer turned on. You'll be using it again in a little while. (The computer 
uses less power than a 100-watt light bulb, so you don't need to turn it off until you're 
finished using it for the day.) 

Keyboard Review 

As you discovered when you went through An Introduction, the computer keyboard looks like a 
typewriter keyboard, but it has several keys that typewriters don't have. Even the keys that 
look familiar can behave in strange and apparently magical ways if the programmer decides he 
wants them to. (In a game program, for example, you might be told to press the letter C when 
you want your electronic monster to eat Cleveland, and to press the letter D when you want him 
to crush Detroit. Typing C and D in a word processing program produces a considerably 
different result.) The best way to find out how the keys work in a given program is to read 
the manual that came with the program, but to give you a head start here's a description of the 
most common uses for the special keys on the Apple lie keyboard. 

RETURN 

Pressing Return means that you're ready to proceed. If you're typing something like a memo, 

pressing Return moves the cursor to the next line. 

ESC 

Pressing Escape usually gets you back to the menu. Escape is short for escape, and that's what 

it lets you do in most programs . 



DELETE 

With some programs, you can press DELETE to erase characters to the left of the cursor, 
be careful how you position the cursor before you press DELETE because it erases by 
backspacing. It doesn't erase the character under the cursor.) 



(But 



lie Page 9 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Apple Lore: 

Early models of the Apple II didn't have a DELETE key, so don't be surprised if in some 
programs you press DELETE and nothing happens. If DELETE doesn't work in a particular program, 
the manual that came with the program will tell you how to erase characters some other way. 

SHIFT and CAPS LOCK 

The Shift key works just like the shift key on a typewriter. You hold it down while you type 
another key, and it gives you either the uppercase version of letter keys or the upper 
character on keys with two characters (like the number and punctuation keys in the top row). 

If you want all capital letters, press Caps Lock. When Caps Lock is locked down, all the 
letters you type are capitalized, but no other keys are affected. This makes it possible for 
you to type numbers and capital letters without pressing and releasing the shift key all the 
time. 

Apple Lore: 

Early models of the Apple II didn't have a Caps Lock key because you didn't have a choice 
between uppercase and lowercase. Everything you typed came out capitalized. Consequently, 
programs designed for early models of the Apple II don't recognize lowercase letters. To get 
these programs to run correctly on your Apple lie, you need to press Caps Lock down. 

Keys That Move the Cursor 

The cursor is a little square or dash that marks your place on the screen. It usually starts 
out in the upper-left corner of the screen and moves to the right with every character you 
type, showing you where the character you type next will appear. In many programs, 
particularly word processing programs, when the cursor reaches the end of a line, it jumps to 
the next line automatically (you don't have to press Return). This is called wraparound. 

The Arrow Keys 

If you discover a mistake in something you've typed, you can move the cursor to the mistake by 
using the arrow keys located in the bottom-right corner of the keyboard. Pressing UP-ARROW 
moves the cursor one line up. Pressing DOWN-ARROW moves the cursor one line down. Pressing 
LEFT-ARROW moves the cursor one character to the left. And pressing RIGHT-ARROW moves the 
cursor (surprise!) one character to the right. 

Apple Lore: 

Early models of the Apple II didn't have up and down arrow keys, so programmers who needed to 

make the cursor move up and down took matters into their own hands and designated certain keys 

on the keyboard to accomplish that function. 

Usually they designated a set of four keys (that formed a cross) to be the up, down, left, and 

right cursor moving keys . 

If you run across a program that uses these keys instead of the arrow keys, you'll know that 
you're dealing with a vintage Apple program. You won't have any trouble using the program on 
your Apple lie it will just take some getting used to. 

TAB 

Tab is another key that moves the cursor (in some programs), but it doesn't move the cursor one 
character at a time. Pressing Tab moves the cursor forward a preset number of characters 
usually eight. Some programs let you set your own tabs the way you can with a typewriter. 



lie Page 10 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Keys That Control Other Keys 

Programmers use CONTROL, OPEN-APPLE, and the solid Apple key in combination with other keys to 

perform special functions in their programs . 

For example, a program might tell you to press OPEN-APPLE-P in order to print something. Since 
key combinations vary from program to program, the only way to find out how a given program 
uses CONTROL, OPEN-APPLE, and the solid Apple key is to read the manual furnished with the 
program. 

There are, however, two key combinations that have predictable results: 

Pressing OPEN-APPLE-CONTROL-RESET restarts the computer. 

Pressing the solid Apple key-CONTROL-RESET starts a self-diagnostic test to see if the Apple 
lie innards are in good working order. The test lasts only about 20 seconds. During that time, 
moving patterns appear on the screen to let you know that the test is in progress. If the 
Apple lie is healthy, you'll get the message SYSTEM OK. If you get any other message, consult 
your Apple dealer. (You don't need to perform this test unless you suspect something's wrong 
with your computer . ) 

Keys That Can Be Confusing 

Typists sometimes use the letters 1 and o interchangeably with the numbers 1 and 0. You can't 
do that when you're using a computer. The computer interprets numbers and letters very 
differently. 

The SPACE bar is another key that can cause confusion. Pressing the SPACE bar inserts a space 
character. It's important that you think of a space as a character so you don't use it 
interchangeably with the right arrow which appears to produce the same result but doesn't. 

Starting and Stopping the Apple lie 

There are two ways to start up Apple lie programs. You use one method when the power is off, 
the other when the power is already on. 

Starting Up With the Power Off 

Here's a review of the first startup method: 

Put a program disk in drive 1. 

Turn on the monitor. 

Turn on the Apple lie power. 

Starting Up With the Power On 

Use this method of starting up a program, or switching from one program to another, when the 
power is already on. It reduces wear and tear on the power switch and other computer 
components . 

Make sure the disk drive light is off, then take the last disk you were using out of drive 1. 
Put the program disk you want to use into drive 1. 

Hold down OPEN APPLE and CONTROL while you press RESET, then release all three keys, starting 
with RESET. (If it seems a little awkward, you're doing it right. If it were more convenient, 
you might do it accidentally. ) 



lie Page 11 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Turning the Power Off and On: 

If you insist on turning the power off and on as a way of switching from one program to 
another, wait at least 15 seconds from the time you turn off the power to the time you turn it 
back on to give the computer's memory a chance to clear. 

If you'd like, you can practice the OPEN-APPLE-CONTROL-RESET method of starting up using the 
same disk you used before, An Introduction. When you see the title display, press Escape 
(unless you feel like going through the disk again). 

Stopping 

Stopping is a pretty intuitive procedure. You turn off the power to the monitor and you turn 
off the power to the Apple lie. But there are a few things you should think about before 
flipping the power switch. 

Save your work. As you use your computer to write letters and such, a copy of your letter is 
kept in the computer's memory (much more on this later). But it's kept in memory only as long 
as the power is on. If you want a permanent copy of your composition, you must save it on a 
disk before turning off the power. 

Don't turn off the power until the disk drive light is off. The disk drive light tells you when 
the disk drive is reading (retrieving something) and writing (recording something) on the disk. 
If you turn off the computer while the disk drive light is on, you could damage the disk and 
lose some of the information recorded on it. Wait until the light goes out before you turn off 
the power. 

If something goes wrong (see troubleshooting) and the disk drive light stays on for an 
inordinately long time, you can stop the disk drive by holding down CONTROL while you press 
RESET. 

All About Disks 

Over time you'll accumulate two kinds of disks: disks that contain programs (instructions that 
tell the computer what to do), and disks that contain your data (the memos, budgets, lists, and 
other stuff you compose at the computer keyboard) . 

Initially, program disks are more expensive than the blank disks you use to store data. But 
once a disk contains your budgets and lists, it's worth as much as the time you spent entering 
the data in the first place. In either case, it pays to take good care of your disks and to 
make copies of important disks in case something ever happens to your original. 

Anatomy of a Disk 

Disks are circular sheets of plastic coated with metallic oxide. Information is recorded on 
them magnetically much the way sound is recorded on cassette tape. They are sealed inside 
black, plastic jackets that protect them from fingerprints and dust. 

As you discovered when you started up An Introduction, you're supposed to put disks in the disk 
drive jacket and all. The disk spins inside the jacket, and as it spins, a honeycomb material 
inside the jacket cleans and lubricates the disk. Never remove a disk from its jacket (and 
expect to use the disk again). Of course, if it's worth a few dollars to you, go ahead and 
dissect a blank disk to see what's inside. 

As the disk spins inside the jacket, every usable part of the disk passes under the oval cutout 
in the disk jacket where the disk drive's read/write head can get at it. Avoid touching the 



lie Page 12 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

disk through the oval cutout or you defeat the purpose of the jacket. 

Both the DuoDisk and the Disk II drives are designed for 5 1/4-inch, single-sided, 
single-density disks. 

The Write-Enable Notch 

The notch in the upper-right corner of the disk jacket is called the write-enable notch. If 
that notch is covered, you can't write (save) things on the disk or otherwise change the 
contents of the disk. All you can do is read (load) things from the disk. If the notch is 
uncovered, you can write on it. (Writing doesn't take place through the notch. The notch just 
lets the disk drive know whether or not it's OK to write on the disk.) 

Many programs that you buy don't have a write-enable notch because the manufacturer doesn't 
want you to change the contents of the disk by mistake. When you don't want the contents of 
your data disks changed by mistake, you can cover the write-enable notch with a removable 
write-protect tab. (You'll find sheets of write-protect tabs packed with boxes of blank 
disks . ) 

Two-sided Disks: 

The training disk packed with this manual has information recorded on both sides. That's 
possible because the disk is certified for double-sided use, and it's practical and economical 
for disks like this one that won't be used on a daily basis. Most disks are designed for 
single-sided use (the disk drive uses only one side of the disk at a time anyway), and you risk 
losing valuable programs and information if you use them any other way. Blank disks are cheap 
compared to the cost of reentering lost data, so don't cut corners by trying to use both sides 
of disks designed for single-sided use. 

Always put single-sided disks in the disk drive with the label facing up. If the disk doesn't 
have a label, put it in the disk drive with the seams on the disk jacket facing down. 

Care of Disks 

Here are some general rules for handling disks: 

Don't touch the disk (the part that's visible through the oval cutout). 

Hold the disk by its label or any part of the jacket. 

Store disks in the envelopes they came in. 

Store disks vertically to keep dust from collecting on them. 

Use a felt-tip pen to write on the disk label. Using a pencil or a ball-point pen can put 
dents in the recording surface. 

Don't use an eraser on a label. Eraser dust can damage the disk. 

Don't attach paper clips to disks. 

Keep disks away from direct sunlight, moisture, and extremes of heat and cold. On a hot day, 
car trunks, dashboards, and glove compartments can be a disk's worst enemy. 

Keep disks away from magnets or devices like telephones, television sets, and large motors. 
(It's OK to lay them temporarily on the computer or disk drive.) 



lie Page 13 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

If you follow these guidelines, your disks will last forever. (Actually they'll last an 
average of 150 hours of in-use time which might as well be forever considering the few seconds 
it takes to load information from a disk.) If you don't follow these guidelines, you'd better 
hope you have a backup copy. 

Copying Disks 

Disks are sturdy enough to withstand hundreds of trips in and out of your disk drive, but they 
won't survive a single hot afternoon on the dashboard of your car. That's why it's critical 
that you take good care of your disks and make copies of important disks in case something ever 
happens to your original. 

Disks That Can't Be Copied: 

Don't be surprised if you can't duplicate every program you buy. Many manufacturers copy 
protect (make it impossible to copy) their disks to protect themselves from software pirates 
who illegally duplicate and distribute their programs. 

If a program you buy isn't copyable, the manufacturer generally provides one backup copy or 
tells you how to replace a damaged program disk at a nominal cost. 

You'll find a program for copying disks on the ProDOS User's Disk that came with your disk 
drive. The program is relatively easy to use if you keep these points in mind: 

The program makes reference to your source and destination volumes. Volume is just another 
word for disk. The source volume is the disk you're copying from. The destination volume is 
the disk you're copying to (either a blank disk or a disk that contains expendible 
information) . 

You'll be asked to supply the location of your source and destination volumes by their slot and 
drive numbers. The slot refers to the slot inside the computer that contains your disk drive 
controller card. If you followed the disk drive installation instructions, the slot number 
will be 6 . If you're using a DuoDisk, the drive on the left is drive 1, and the drive on the 
right is drive 2. 

When the program asks you for a slot or drive number, it supplies a default (preset) response. 
This default number will be used unless you type an alternative. To accept the default number, 
press Return. To change the default, type over the character that appears on the display. 

Copy An Introduction 

Practice using the copy program on the ProDOS User's Disk by making a copy of An Introduction. 

Important ! 

These instructions assume that you have a DuoDisk or a pair of disk drives. If you have a 
single disk drive, watch for instructions on the screen that tell you when to swap your source 
volume for your destination volume. 

Start up the ProDOS User's Disk. 

Press F (for ProDOS Filer <UTILITIES>) 
Press V (for VOLUME COMMANDS). 
Press C (for COPY A VOLUME). 



lie Page 14 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Press Return to indicate that your controller card is in slot 6. 

Press Return to indicate that you'll be putting your source disk, An Introduction, in drive 1. 

Press Return to indicate that your controller card is in slot 6. 

Press Return to indicate that you'll be putting your destination disk in drive 2. If you don't 
have a second drive, type 1. You'll see this message at the bottom of the display: 

INSERT DISKS AND PRESS <RET> 

Only Got One Drive? 

You can make copies with a single disk drive it just takes a lot longer. Watch for instructions 
on the display that tell you when to swap your source volume for your destination volume. If 
you need more guidance, follow the instructions for Copying a Volume in the ProDOS User's 
Manual . 

Put your source disk, An Introduction, in drive 1 and your destination disk, a blank disk, in 
drive 2 and press Return. 

You'll hear some whirring and see the words FORMATTING, READING, and WRITING as the disk is 
being copied. 

When it's all over, you'll see this message: 

COPY COMPLETE 

When you see that message, take your new backup copy of An Introduction out of drive 2 and 
label it with a felt-tip pen. (If you don't really want a backup copy of An Introduction, you 
can use the copy you just made as a destination disk the next time you need to copy something.) 

Problems? 

If you have problems copying this or any other disk, consult the ProDOS User's Manual. 



Chapter 2 Summary 

Starting Up With the Power Off 

Put a program disk in drive 1. 

Turn on your monitor. 

Turn on your Apple lie. 

Starting Up With the Power On 

Put a program disk in drive 1 

Hold down OPEN-APPLE and CONTROL while you press RESET. 

Return: Indicates that you've finished reading or typing something and that you're ready to 
proceed. 



lie Page 15 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Escape: Gets you back to a previous menu or out of what you're doing. 

DELETE: Erases characters to the left of the cursor. 

UP-ARROW, DOWN-ARROW, RIGHT-ARROW, and LEFT-ARROW: Move the cursor. 

Caps Lock: Capitalizes all letters automatically. 

CONTROL, OPEN-APPLE,: Make other keys behave differently. 

Tab: Moves the cursor forward a preset number of characters (usually eight). 

SPACE bar: Inserts a space character. 

Shift: Gives you the uppercase version of letter keys or the upper character on two-character 
keys. 

Chapter 3 : Application Programs 

So far, you've been using the computer to learn about the computer. You can also use the 
computer to keep track of student's grades, write memos, prepare business reports, do job 
costing, keep personnel records, and learn foreign languages, among hundreds of other things. 

The magic that transforms your computer from a teacher to a bookkeeper is the program you load 
into it. Programs designed for a particular purpose or application are called application 
programs. You can write them yourself or you can use ready-made programs as described in this 
chapter. 

Popular Application Programs 

In the next few pages, you'll learn about nine types of application programs. 

Home 





Business 


School 




Accounting 


X 










Communications 


X 


X 


X 






Data Base 


X 


X 


X 






Education 






X 




X 


Entertainment 






X 




X 


Graphics 


X 






X 




Home Finance 












Spreadsheet 


X 






X 




Word Processing 


X 


X 


X 






Accounting 













Accounting software does the same things a manual accounting system can do (general ledger, 
accounts receivable, accounts payable, payroll, inventory), but with much greater speed, 
accuracy, and control. The increased speed and accuracy allow you to get up-to-date reports 
about your financial position as you need them, instead of waiting for monthly or quarterly 
reports from your accountant. 

A good accounting program can help you improve your cash flow management, boost your collection 
rate of receivables, plan payments to take advantage of vendor discounts, maintain inventory 
levels that minimize cash investment, and improve customer service. 



lie Page 16 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Most accounting software packages are designed around a general ledger. The other modules 

(accounts receivable, for example) plug into the general ledger to allow automated posting. 

This modular approach allows smaller businesses to start with a general ledger package alone 
and add additional modules as they are needed. 

Communications Software 

With communications software and a modem, you can exchange messages with other computers and 
information services over the phone lines. 

Here are a few of the things you can do with communications software and a modem. 

Access hundreds of data bases (called information services) each with a library's worth of 
information. 

Exchange mail with colleagues (who are similarly equipped with a computer, communications 
software, and a modem) . 

Share business data with colleagues. 

Transfer information between computers that would otherwise be incompatible. 

Bank by phone. 

Get information from the office's main computer while you work at home. 

Get the latest stock quotes from an information service. 

Shop by phone. 

Receive public domain (free!) software from a computer bulletin board. 

Besides letting you communicate with computers across the country, communications software lets 
you communicate with computers across the room. 

Information Services 

There are two kinds of information services: general purpose information services, like The 
Dow Jones News /Retrieval Service, The SourceSM, and CompuServe, and specialized services for 
lawyers, journalists, stockbrokers, doctors, and others. 

The Dow Jones News /Retrieval Service gives you up-to-the-minute information on 6000 
corporations as well as current and historical stock quotes, money-market analysis and 
forecasts, news highlights from The Wall Street Journal, and even movie reviews. 

The Dow Jones service is one of the big three general purpose information services. The other 
two are The Source and CompuServe. Like the Dow Jones service. The Source and CompuServe offer 
news highlights and stock quotes, but business isn't their primary focus. With The Source and 
CompuServe you can, for example, check airline schedules and make reservations, do your 
shopping from computerized catalogs, do your banking, check the latest news, sports, weather 
and movie reviews, exchange messages with other subscribers, and download (have the service 
send you) public domain (free) software. 

If you're interested in one of these information services, ask your dealer how you can 
subscribe. He can tell you how to get your user ID, your password, and the local phone number 
of the information service that interests you. 



lie Page 17 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Bulletin Boards 

Bulletin boards came into being back in 1978 as a way for local computer club members to 
exchange messages with each other and share programs by phone. Today there are over 300 
computerized bulletin boards in the United States, and you don't have to belong to a computer 
club to use one. All you need is a computer, a modem, communications software, and the phone 
number of your local BBS (Bulletin Board System) . You can get that from your computer dealer 
(in some cases, he'll be a SYSOP, the system operator of a bulletin board), from a computer 
club, or from one of the BBS articles that frequently appear in computer magazines. 

Bulletin boards are popular for three reasons: 

They're free. You don't have to subscribe or pay for connect time the way you do with an 
information service. 

They're a source of free software some of it professional quality, some of it hopelessly 
bug-ridden. 

They're a good way to meet people. 

Data Base 

Data base programs are for keeping track of lists of information: mailing lists, client 
information, inventories, addresses, phone numbers, test results, itineraries, medical and 
dental records any information you now store on forms or index cards. 

Data is just a fancy word for information. A data base is a central clearing-house for 
information. Once you write your information into a data base program, you can retrieve the 
information any time you need it. You can also have the data base program cross reference that 
information with other information in the data base. For example, you can retrieve a list of 
all customers who placed orders last month, or a list of all students who scored 100% on at 
least one test. 

Businesses use data base programs to keep track of customer records and inventory. You can use 
the same kind of program at home to keep a record of your valuables (for insurance purposes), 
to catalog your stamp or coin collection, to keep membership records for a club, to keep 
statistics on a sports team, and more. 

Educational Software 

Programs that teach are called educational software, or courseware. 

Computers are good teachers because they give you a chance to learn at your own speed in an 
interactive, entertaining way. To give you an idea of how entertaining a computer program can 
be, there's a program that teaches touch typing in the guise of a shoot 'em up game. Letters 
and words are fired at your spaceship from the four corners of the screen, and you have to type 
the correct letter or word before the letters crash into your vehicle. 

Educational software isn't just for kids. There are programs that help you prepare for college 
entrance exams and that tutor you in foreign languages for your next trip abroad. 

Computer-Aided Instruction 

Teachers who want to try their hand at programming can use a programming language designed 
especially for educators called PILOT, short for Programmed Inquiry, Learning, Or Teaching. 



lie Page 18 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

PILOT lets you design your own courseware, or CAI { Computer-Aided Instruction). 

More About Apples in Education 

To get an idea of the number and variety of educational software packages available for the 
Apple lie, go to your local bookstore and thumb through one of the software directories that 
describe and rank Apple II software. Most software directories devote a whole chapter to 
educational software. At last count there were over 3000 educational programs available for 
the Apple lie. 

Entertainment 

Don't be ashamed. Lots of people rationalize their purchase of a computer with talk of word 
processing and home budgets, but the first program they buy features a pair of jaws chasing gum 
drops through a maze. 

There are all sorts of games for the Apple lie, ranging from computer simulations of board 
games like Chess to adventure games sophisticated simulations that put you in a dungeon or on a 
remote island and challenge you to find the hidden treasure while avoiding monsters, booby 
traps, and other pitfalls. 

Graphics 

Business graphics programs convert numerical information monthly forecasts, regional figures, 
departmental budgets into presentation-quality bar, line, pie, and scatter graphs. Graphics 
generated with your Apple lie can enhance presentations and even aid in business decisions 
because pictures are easier to digest than statistics. 

Less business-like graphics programs, like MousePaint&#8482 ; , turn your monitor into an easel 
and your mouse into a paint brush, allowing you to create and save masterpieces. A graphics 
program is to an artist what a word processor is to a writer it encourages you to try out a 
variety of approaches before you commit your drawing to a hard copy. It makes it easy to 
revise and rearrange until you're completely satisfied with your creation. For less artistic 
types, there are graphics programs that come with a disk full of drawings that you can insert 
into greeting cards, signs, and banners. 

Home Finance 

Home finance programs let you play what if... with your home budget the same way electronic 
spreadsheet programs let financial planners play what if... with their multi-million-dollar 
corporate budgets. Here are some of the things you can do with a home finance program: 

Figure out mortgage payments and depreciation on your house. 

Keep track of tax and auto records . 

Prepare budgets for your church group or charity. 

Evaluate repayment schedules on a new home or car. 

Weigh the relative merits of money market, T-bill, stock market, and other investments. 

Spreadsheet Programs 

The first software best seller for personal computers was a program called VisiCalc that 
computerized spreadsheets those sheets of paper divided into rows and columns that are to 
business people what legal pads are to lawyers. 

With the traditional spreadsheet, accountants and others who had to deal in numbers filled in 
their asset and liability figures in pencil. Then, with the help of a calculator, they arrived 



lie Page 19 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

at the bottom line. If any number changed, or if they wanted to try out a different pricing 
strategy, it sent a ripple effect through the whole spreadsheet (which is why an eraser was as 
critical to using a spreadsheet as a pencil and a calculator). 

With electronic spreadsheets, you still have to fill in your assets and liabilities, but by 
filling in formulas that define the interrelationships of all the assets and liabilities, you 
can try out different pricing scenarios and let the program do all the recalculating for you. 

With electronic spreadsheets you can play what if... until the cows come home, or at least 
until your budget deadline rolls around. Spreadsheet programs take the drudgery out of 
financial planning and leave you more time for creative financing. 

Templates : 

If you don't know how to figure out formulas for depreciation and such, you can get templates 
that furnish the formulas so all you do is fill in a form. 

Word Processing 

They say that everyone is working on a screenplay or a novel these days, but even if you never 
write anything longer than a memo, a book report, or the minutes from a PTA meeting, you'll 
never use your typewriter again after you experience the ease of word processing. 

Because it's so painless to edit with a word processing program, it encourages your best 
writing efforts. (So, if you aren't working on your novel now, you'll probably start one once 
you discover word processing. ) 

Here are just a few of the things you can do with a word processor: 

Change letters, words, and sentences without retyping those parts of the document that haven't 
changed. 

Delete words and sentences, and the document will rearrange itself to fill up the holes in the 
page. 

Move paragraphs if you think your report would work better that way. 

Change the margins of your document (after you've written it!) to make it look better or 
longer. 

Need Help With Spelling? 

Some word processors come with companion programs that check and correct your spelling. 

Integrated Software 

Integrated software is a group of application programs (usually on one disk) designed to work 
together and share data. A typical integrated software package includes word processing, data 
base, and spreadsheet programs. 

With integrated software, you can combine information created with different applications into 
one document. For example, you can write a report with a word processing program, and add a 
statistics section from a data base program and a budget section created with a spreadsheet 
program. 



lie Page 20 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Another advantage of integrated software is that the commands you learn for one application 
(like word processing) work the same way for the other applications on the disk. This shortens 
the time it takes you to learn the programs and makes you productive a lot faster. 

Industry Specific Software 

Industry specific software, also called vertical market software, is software that caters to a 
particular audience or profession. It's more expensive than general-purpose software, but 
much, much cheaper than hiring a programmer to write software from scratch. 

For lawyers there are programs that handle billing, help with research, and keep track of court 
appearances and filing dates. For doctors there is data base software customized to deal with 
patient histories, to help diagnose illnesses, and to match allergy symptoms to causes. Other 
medical software handles billing and helps process insurance claims. 

There are programs for manufacturing control, for scientific measurement and analysis, and for 
virtually any area where there is a specialized need for calculating or data sorting. 

Vertical market software isn't always listed in software catalogs, but you can find out what's 
available by reading the software ads in professional journals, and by attending computer 
seminars sponsored by your professional organization. The American Bar Association, for 
example, has a Committee on Computers that sponsors users groups (computer clubs) for lawyers 
and promotes conferences and seminars on the use of computers in the legal profession. 

Choosing Application Programs 

By now you've probably thought of lots of ways you can use the Apple lie to lighten your 
workload or help with your homework. The next step is to get some application programs and 
learn how to use them. If you have a task in mind, but don't know the type of application 
program that can handle it, talk to your dealer. The odds are he can help you because there's 
an application for any task imaginable from tracking the space shuttle to tracking the acidity 
in your barrels of wine. 

Build your software collection gradually, the way you build your book and record libraries. 
And choose software the way you choose books on the recommendations of friends . 

There are over 16,000 programs for the Apple II family of computers, some from Apple, many more 
from independent software developers. Ask your Apple dealer to help you choose the software 
that meets your needs . 

Users Groups 

If you don't know many people who use computers, you should consider joining an Apple users 
group. Computer-wise friends can cut your learning time in half and help you select the best 
software for your needs. Joining a users group can also save you some money most user groups 
have a library of free public domain software written by members of the group. 

Computer Books and Magazines 

If you're too shy or too busy to attend users group meetings, you can find out a lot about the 
relative merits of different software packages by reading reviews in computer magazines and by 
flipping through one of several software directories available for the Apple II family of 
computers. Computer magazines are available at most newsstands. You'll find software 
directories in the computer section at most bookstores . 



lie Page 21 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Behind the Scenes 

The best application programs don ' t require you to know anything about how the computer works . 
Using them is as easy as using a typewriter or a toaster. You put the program disk in drive 1, 
turn on the power, and follow the instructions on the screen, as you did with An Introduction. 
But understanding how the computer works how application programs give the computer its 
personality as a word processor or a spreadsheet, or how your memos, budgets, and personnel 
records are stored inside the memory of the computer will boost your confidence and make you 
more productive and playful with your Apple lie. 

Chapter 3 Summary 

Application programs are programs designed for a particular purpose, such as budgeting, 
financial planning, or cataloging your butterfly collection. 
Popular Applications 

Accounting: for automating your general ledger, accounts receivable, accounts payable, payroll, 
and inventory. 

Communications: exchanging information with other computers and computer services by phone. 

Data Base: for keeping track of lists (addresses, inventories, collections). 

Education: for learning. 

Entertainment: for fun. 

Graphics: for charts, graphs, drawings. 

Home Finance: for budgeting, portfolio management, tax planning. 

Spreadsheet: for financial planning. 

Word Processing: for generating letters, reports, books. 

Integrated Software: a collection of programs (usually word processing, data base, and 
spreadsheet) designed to share data. 

Industry-specific Software: programs designed for a particular audience (doctors, lawyers, and 
pig farmers ) . 



Chapter 4 : The Inside Story 

When you connected your disk drive to your Apple lie, you popped the top and got your first 
look at the integrated circuits, or chips, inside the computer. In this chapter, you'll learn 
what some of the chips do, and how they are used to process your data. 

Start up The Inside Story to find out what makes your computer tick. 

Here's a closer look at the components that put the Apple lie through its paces. 

The Microprocessor 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 22 of 74 



One of the most important chips on the main circuit board is the microprocessor. The 
microprocessor is the brain of the computer system the chip that carries out the instructions 
in the program one by one in the order that they appear. The Apple lie has a 65C02 
microprocessor . 

RAM 

The row of small chips are called random access memory chips or RAM. These chips store both 
the programs you load into the computer and the data you're working with (memos, budgets, 
personnel files, students' grades, and so on). The information in RAM is stored as electrical 
impulses sort of like tiny light bulbs that can either be on or off. Each light bulb is called 
a bit, and it takes eight of these bits to express each character on the keyboard. A series of 
eight bits is called a byte. Because the information in RAM is stored electrically, it 
disappears when the power is turned off. That's why it's important to think of RAM as a 
temporary storage compartment. 

The Apple lie has 64K of RAM, which is roughly equivalent to 48 typed, double-spaced pages of 
text. You can add additional RAM by plugging an auxiliary memory card into the slot marked 
AUX. CONNECTOR on the main circuit board. 

K: 

Computer memory is measure in K's, short for kilobyte. (A kilobyte is 1024 bytes.) As you 
know, one byte equals one character. 64K is 65,536 characters. Part of that 64K is taken up by 
the application program you're using. The rest is available to store the business report or 
budget you're working on. 

This part of the computer's memory is called random access memory because the microprocessor 
can access any location within RAM at random. It doesn't have to start at the first memory 
location and plod through until it reaches the location it's after. 

RAM is sometimes called main memory, or just plain memory. Think of it as a grid of thousands 
of boxes, each identified by a number called its address. Each box can hold one piece of code 
an instruction for the microprocessor, a character (the H in Hello Mom, for example), or 
another address in memory (which tells the microprocessor to jump back to square 1 or wherever 
and follow the instruction it finds there). 

Scrolling: 

Of course there's a lot more room in memory than there is room on the screen to display it. 
Picture the information in memory as being written on a paper scroll, and the monitor's screen 
as a window in front of the scroll. To see a different part of the scroll, move the cursor to 
the bottom of the screen using the arrow keys. Press the arrow key again and a new line or 
column will come into view. This is called scrolling. 

ROM 

Whereas RAM chips store both programs and information that change every time you use your 
computer (one day a letter, the next day a budget), ROM chips contain information that never 
changes. And unlike RAM, the information in ROM stays intact when the power goes off, which is 
just as well because one of the programs in ROM tells the microprocessor how to get started 
when the power is turned on. 



In addition to the program that gets the computer started when the power first comes on, ROM 
contains a programming language called BASIC, an acronym for Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic 
Instruction Code. BASIC is easy to learn because it lets you give instructions to the computer 



lie Page 23 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

in a language similar to English. An interpreter program, also in ROM, then translates those 
English-like terms into machine language a binary code of zeros and ones that is the only 
language the microprocessor can really understand. 

Other Languages: 

There are other programming languages you can use with the Apple lie (Logo and Pascal, for 
example), but they aren't stored in ROM. You have to load them into RAM from disks before you 
can write programs (the same way you have to load application programs into RAM before you can 
use them) . 

How It Works 

Armed with this rudimentary knowledge of what RAM, ROM, and the microprocessor do, you'll be 
able to understand how programs are loaded into memory from disks, and how the information you 
create while using a program is saved on and retrieved from disks. You don't need to know 
everything about how the computer works to run programs successfully anymore than you need to 
know how an internal combustion engine works to drive a car but you'll use your computer with 
greater confidence and creativity once you have a feel for how programs and data move through 
the computer system. 

Starting Up 

The first thing that happens when you flip the Apple lie power switch is that a program in ROM 
tells the microprocessor to check drive 1 for a disk with an operating system. An operating 
system is a set of instructions that tell the computer how to work with the information on 
disks. Because the operating system controls the way information is retrieved from and stored 
on disks, it is also called a disk operating system. 

Once the operating system is in RAM, the operating system tells the microprocessor to load the 
application program into RAM. Once that happens, the computer takes on its personality as a 
Spanish teacher, a financial planner, or an arcade game, depending on what kind of program disk 
you have in drive 1 . 

Two-Stage Startup: 

Some programs, like AppleWorks, are too big to fit on one disk, so they come on two disks. The 
first disk, usually labeled the Startup or Boot disk, contains the operating system. The 
second disk, usually labeled the Program disk, contains the program. Starting up a two-disk 
program is called a two-stage boot or a two-stage startup. To execute a two-stage startup, all 
you do is put the startup disk in drive 1 and turn on the computer. A message on the screen 
will tell you to exchange the program disk for the startup disk and to press some key (usually 
Return) to start using the program. 

Creating Something From Scratch 

At this point, you start creating your letter or your budget, and everything you type (your 
data) is stored in RAM. 

Saving Data 

It ' s important for you to remember that the information stored in RAM is only stored 
temporarily. Before you turn off the computer or switch to another program, you must save your 
work (data) on a disk. When you save your work on a disk, it's called a file, and you give it 
a filename by which you'll be able to retrieve it later. 



lie Page 24 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

The application program you're using will tell you how to save a file onto a disk usually it 
will simply be a matter of selecting the Save option from a menu, or typing a special key 
combination like OPEN-APPLE-S (for Save). 

Revising an Existing File 

You won't always be starting a document from scratch. Sometimes you'll be working with data 
that you entered on a previous occasion and saved on a data disk data like students' grades, 
personnel records, and so on. 
Here's how you get at that data: 

You start up the application program you used to create the data in the first place. 

You load the file, by its filename, according to the instructions that came with the 
application program. (Load a File will either be an option on the program's menu, or you'll 
use a special key combination like OPEN-APPLE-L, for Load.) 

You revise the data. 

And you save the data, usually on the same disk you loaded it from. 

Decisions, Decisions: 

When you save a revised file, you have the option of saving it with the same name you used 
before, or with a new name. If you save the revised file with the original filename, you write 
over (and lose) the original data. If you save the revised information with a new filename, 
both the original and the revised version are preserved on the disk. 

If you forget what you named a file, most programs offer you some means of examining the 
contents of a disk. If you're lucky, there will be an option on the program's menu like List 
Files on Disk. If there isn't such an option, you can use the List program on the ProDOS 
User's Disk that came with your disk drive. 

In a Nutshell 

That's the general idea of what happens every time you use an application program. Here it is 
in a nutshell: 

You turn on the power, and a program in ROM tells the microprocessor to look for an operating 
system on the disk in drive 1. 

The operating system is loaded into RAM. 

The application program is loaded into RAM. 

You start a document from scratch or you load something you created earlier and revise it. 

You save your work on a disk (and print it). 

You switch to a different program, you start creating a different document with the same 
program, or you turn off the power and quit for the day. 

Program Disks and Data Disks 



lie Page 25 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

When you're using application programs, you're working with two kinds of disks: program disks 
and data disks. 

The program disk is the disk that contains the application program and the operating system. 
If you're lucky, it came with a manual that tells you how to use it, and with a backup copy of 
the program disk in case something happens to the original. 

A data disk starts out as a blank disk that you buy by the box full from your Apple dealer. It 
becomes a data disk when you format it and start saving your data on it. 

Formatting 

Formatting a disk is a process that marks the disk off (magnetically) into sections where your 
data can be stored. These sections are numbered during the formatting process so the operating 
system will have a way of knowing where a particular file has been stored. Once a file is 
stored, its location is recorded in the disk's directory (or catalog) along with its name. 

Think of formatting as laying down a network of roads on your blank disk. When information is 
stored on one of those roads, its address is recorded in the disk's equivalent of an address 
book. When the operating system needs to find a particular file, it checks the address book 
and learns that COMPANY . REPORT is located at the corner of 5th and Main. You get the idea. 

You need to format a disk only once. If you format a disk that has data on it, that data will 
be plowed under and paved over in the process of laying out roads on the disk. Reformatting 
disks is a good way to recycle disks that contain data you don't need anymore, but it's a 
disaster if you do need the data that was stored on those disks. Reformatting a disk with 
important data is one of those little disasters that happens at least once to everyone who's 
ever used a computer. It's the reason you make backup copies of every data disk. 

Many application programs offer formatting as one of the options on the program's menu. 

If your application program doesn't give you a way to format disks and if your application 
program uses the ProDOS operating system you can use the formatting program on the ProDOS 
User's Disk that came with your disk drive. The ProDOS User's Manual explains how to format 
disks . 

Formatting Disks for the Right Operating System 

It all sounds pretty straightforward. There's only one potential pitfall. There are three 
different Apple lie operating systems: 

ProDOS Short for Professional Disk Operating System 

DOS 3.3 Short for Disk Operating System, version 3.3 

Pascal An operating system designed for programs written in the Pascal programming language. 

And each operating system has a different way of formatting disks. If you format a disk for 
ProDOS and the program you're using has the DOS 3.3 operating system, it won't know how to 
store information on or retrieve information from that disk. 

You won't run into this problem if your program disk has a formatting option on the menu. But 
some programmers don't give you a way to format data disks on the program disk. (Either they 
ran out of space on the program disk or they didn't think it was necessary.) They expect you 
to use the formatting program on something called a utilities disk. 



lie Page 26 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Utilities 

Utility disks are disks like the ProDOS User's Disk that contain a variety of general-purpose 
programs that let you do things like copy files, copy the contents of whole disks, list the 
directories of disks, rename files, check disks for flaws that could sabotage your data, and 
format disks. 

Each operating system has its own set of utility programs. ProDOS utilities are on the ProDOS 
User's Disk. DOS 3.3 utilities are on the DOS 3.3 System Master Disk. Pascal utilities are on 
the Pascal System disk. Your Apple dealer can tell you how to acquire the appropriate 
utilities disk, but most of the time the utilities you need will be right on the application 
program disk itself (especially if it's a Pascal-based program). 

Assuming your program doesn't include a formatting option, how can you tell which operating 
system your program uses so you know how to format your data disks? Often the operating system 
will be printed on the label of the program disk, or will be mentioned in the program's manual. 
If it's not, consult your dealer or the developer of the program for guidance. 

Backing Up Your Data 

When you save data on a disk, it's a good idea to make copies of your data on two separate 
disks. Making an extra copy takes only a few seconds, and it will save hours if anything 
happens to your original. 

It's also a good idea to save your data frequently. If you type for an hour without saving 
your work, a power failure or a friend tripping over the power cord will erase everything in 
RAM. If you get in the habit of saving your work every ten minutes (and after every 
particularly inspired entry), you can smile in the face of power failures and clumsy friends. 

Keeping two copies as you go along is one good backup strategy. You can also copy disks at the 
end of the day using the Copy a Volume program on the ProDOS User's Disk. You'll learn more 
about copying disks in the ProDOS User's Manual that came with your disk drive. 

Copy a Volume: 

The Copy a Volume program will copy disks regardless of their operating system. 

Chapter 4 Summary 

Main Parts of the Computer 

Microprocessor: Does the computing. Carries out the instructions in computer programs. 

RAM: Short for random-access memory. This is where programs and data are stored temporarily. 
Whatever is in RAM goes away when the power goes off. 

ROM: Short for read-only memory. Permanent memory. Contains, among other things, information 
the computer needs to get started. 

Four Steps to Using a Computer 

Starting up: Put a program disk in drive 1 and turn on the power. 

Creating information: Use the keyboard to create letters, budgets, charts. 



lie Page 27 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Saving information: Give what you've created a name and store it in a file on a disk for 
permanent storage. 

Retrieving information: Load information from a file back into memory where you can change the 
contents of the file or send the contents of the file out to a printer to produce a paper copy. 



Chapter 5 : Programming 

Writing a computer program involves taking a task, breaking it down into small steps that the 
computer can perform, and expressing those steps in terms the computer can understand. 

There are lots of computer languages, and each language has its virtues. Some are particularly 
suited to scientific applications; others are better for business applications; still others 
are indispensible for creating fast-paced arcade games. BASIC, Logo, and Pascal are three 
programming languages especially suited to beginners. 

BASIC (an acronym for Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code) is easy to learn 
because it allows you to write instructions for the computer in English-like words and phrases. 
It has the additional advantage of being built into your computer, so there are no special 
disks to buy. And BASIC was the first language built into personal computers, so you'll find 
hundreds of books on the subject and many people who speak the same language. 

In this chapter, you'll get a chance to write some simple BASIC programs so you can see what 
programming is all about and whether it's something you want to pursue further. The BASIC 
vocabulary you learn won't apply to other computer languages, but the principles will. 

You Don't Have to Learn to Program: 

There's an application program for almost every imaginable application, so you don't have to 
learn programming to use a computer, but a lot of people learn for the fun and the challenge of 
it. 

If you decide you'd like to learn more about BASIC, you can get the Applesoft Tutorial and the 
Applesoft BASIC Programmer's Reference Manual published by Apple, or you can choose books from 
another publisher more suited to your age, your area of interest (games, graphics, and so on), 
and your level of programming expertise (from tutorials to technical reference manuals). If 
you prefer a more interactive learning experience, you can get an Applesoft BASIC training 
course on disks, similar to the interactive training programs that came with this manual, or 
you can enroll in a programming class at your local college. 

If you decide you'd rather program in Logo, Pascal, or some other language, ask your dealer for 
the appropriate language disks, manuals, and other training materials. 

Getting Into BASIC 

In an earlier chapter, you learned that Applesoft BASIC is built into your Apple lie that it's 
stored permanently in ROM. But how do you get at it? One way to get at it is to start up the 
ProDOS User's Disk and select the last option on the Main Menu APPLESOFT BASIC. Here's how: 

Start up the ProDOS User's Disk. You'll see this display: 

*************************************** PRODOS USER'S 

DISK 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 28 of 74 



COPYRIGHT APPLE COMPUTER, INC. 1983 

it************************************** 

YOUR OPTIONS ARE: 

? - TUTOR: PRODOS EXPLANATION 
F - PRODOS FILER (UTILITIES) 
C - DOS <-> PRODOS CONVERSION 
S - DISPLAY SLOT ASSIGNMENTS 
T - DISPLAY/SET TIME 
B - APPLESOFT BASIC 

PLEASE SELECT ONE OF THE ABOVE 



Press B to select Applesoft BASIC. You'll see this display: 



PRODOS 1.0 



COPYRIGHT APPLE, 1983 



TO RETURN TO MENU, TYPE 

'RUN STARTUP' 

AND PRESS RETURN. 



] 

This loads ProDOS (the Applesoft BASIC operating system) into memory and puts you into the 
BASIC programming environment. 

The square bracket near the bottom of the screen is called a prompt. It's called a prompt 
because it prompts you for information. The blinking square is a cursor. The cursor shows you 
where the characters you type will appear on the screen. 

Why Do You Need a Disk to Load BASIC? 

You don't really need to start up the ProDOS User's Disk to get into the BASIC programming 
environment. You could turn on the Apple lie power without a disk in the disk drive, press 
CONTROL-RESET to stop the disk drive, and start programming. The problem is that you wouldn't 
be able to save any of the programs you write, and you wouldn't be able to load previously 
written programs from a disk into memory. The reason is that while BASIC is built into ROM, 
the operating system (which controls how information is saved on and retrieved from disks) is 
not. Starting up the ProDOS User's Disk loads the ProDOS operating system. 

BASIC Vocabulary 

In this section, you'll learn to use the following statements and commands: 

PRINT: Displays information on the screen so you can communicate with the person using your 
program. 

INPUT:: Gives you a way to ask the person using your program for information and use that 
information in the program. 

LET: : Defines a variable. 



lie Page 29 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

NEW: Erases memory so you can start programming with a clean slate. 

END: Tells the computer that the program is finished. 

LIST: Displays the program in memory. 

RUN: Starts the program that's in memory. 

SAVE: Stores your program in a file on a disk. 

LOAD: Transfers a copy of a program on a disk into memory. 

CAT: Short for Catalog. Displays a list of what's on a disk. 

ProDOS Commands : 

SAVE, LOAD, and CAT are ProDOS operating system commands that you'll use when you're writing 
BASIC programs. 

The PRINT Statement 

PRINT statements are used to communicate with the person using the program. (The words in 
application program menus, on startup displays, and in error messages were all put there by the 
programmer by using PRINT statements assuming the program is written in BASIC.) Here's how the 
PRINT statement works in a BASIC program: 

You type a number . 

You type PRINT. 

Then you type, within quotation marks, the word or phrase you want displayed. (It doesn't 
matter whether you use uppercase or lowercase.) 

Then you press Return. 

Try it by typing this: 

1 PRINT THIS IS MY FIRST PROGRAM. 

and pressing Return. 

Line Numbers : 

Every line in a BASIC program has a number in front of it; these tell the microprocessor the 
order in which to carry out the instructions in the program. 

Now type RUN and press Return. 

If all goes well, the phrase that you typed within quotation marks should appear without 
quotation marks on the line under the word RUN. Your text display should look like this: 

1 PRINT THIS IS MY FIRST PROGRAM. RUN 
THIS IS MY FIRST PROGRAM. 



lie Page 30 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Pressing Return lets the computer know when you've completed a line or instruction. Since you 
have to do it after every line in a BASIC program, you won't be reminded each time. From now 
on, just remember: when you've finished typing a line or an instruction, be sure to press 
Return . 

Fixing Mistakes: 

If you make a mistake while you're programming in Applesoft BASIC, use LEFT-ARROW to back up to 
the scene of your error, then type over it, and use RIGHT-ARROW to get back to the end of the 
line. (DELETE won't work while you're in the BASIC programming environment.) 

If you discover a typing mistake after pressing Return, just retype the line. 

SYNTAX ERROR: 

If you hear a beep and get the message SYNTAX ERROR, it means that you misspelled a BASIC 
command or statement, like PRINT, and the program doesn't know what you're talking about, or 
else it means you left out a quotation mark. If you get such a message, don't panic, just 
retype the line. 

DOS 3.3 Requires Uppercase: 

DOS 3.3, another Applesoft BASIC operating system, accepts only uppercase statements and 
commands. ProDOS accepts instructions in either uppercase or lowercase. 

Combining Statements to Create a Program 

Now that you know how to fix mistakes, type HOME to clear the screen, type NEW to clear your 
one-line program from memory, then try typing this slightly longer program. Don't forget to 
press Return after every line. 

1 PRINT ROSES ARE RED 2 PRINT VIOLETS ARE BLUE 3 PRINT THIS IS AS EASY 4 PRINT AS TYING 
YOUR SHOE 5 END 

(The END statement lets the computer know that the program is finished. ) 

When you finish typing your program, try it out by typing RUN. The result should look like 

this : 

ROSES ARE RED VIOLETS ARE BLUE THIS IS AS EASY AS TYING YOUR SHOE 

Notice that line 1 was executed first, then line 2, then line 3, and so on. It doesn't matter 
in which order you type the lines; the computer will carry them out from lowest to highest line 
number . 

If you don't believe it, type NEW (to clear the computer's memory), then retype the program in 
a different sequence, like this: 

NEW 3 PRINT THIS IS AS EASY 1 PRINT ROSES ARE RED 5 END 4 PRINT AS TYING YOUR SHOE 2 PRINT 
VIOLETS ARE BLUE 

Type RUN and see what happens . 

Replacing Statements 

If you decide you want to replace one of the statements in your program with another, all you 
have to do is type the number of the line you want to replace and the new statement. You don't 
need to retype the whole program. Try typing this: 



lie Page 31 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



1 PRINT ROSES ARE PINK 

Now type RUN. 

Notice that your new line 1 replaces your old line 1, but all the other lines remain the same. 

Erasing Statements: 

To erase a whole line, just type the line number without a statement. For example, to get rid 
of the line VIOLETS ARE BLUE, you'd type 2 with no text following it, then press Return. 

Inserting Statements 

Suppose you wanted to insert a PRINT statement between line 1 and 2? You'd be out of luck. 
You ' d have to renumber every line in your program because there ' s no room between lines 1 and 
2. That's why it's considered good programming practice to number your program by tens (10, 
20, 30 instead of 1, 2, 3). That way there's room for you to insert anything you find you've 
left out in the first go-round. 

The LIST Statement 

Suppose you want to look at all the program statements after you've typed them into memory? 
You can do it using the LIST statement. 

The LIST statement shows all the program lines in memory in numerical order. Even if you 
originally typed them starting with line 4 and ending with line 1, they'll appear in order 
when you type the LIST command. 

Type LIST. 

Is That All There Is? 

The PRINT statement is pretty straightforward, but by itself it doesn't do much for you. If 

all you wanted to do was type sentences on the screen, you'd use a word processing program, not 

a bunch of PRINT statements. The PRINT statement is only powerful when you use it in 

conjunction with other statements like INPUT and LET. 

Before you learn about INPUT and LET, erase your first program from memory. 
Type NEW 

Don't Worry: 

Before you learn to write long and useful programs, you'll learn how to save them on disks so 
they won't be lost when you erase them from memory. 

Variables 

Remember how that first disk you used asked for your name, then used it, like an old friend, on 
every possible occasion? That little trick was done with variables. Variables are place 
holders letters or words that hold a place for some piece of information that the person using 
the program will provide. 

The programmer who wrote that program didn't know what your name would be, so he assigned a 
variable to that piece of information and used the variable every time he wanted the program to 
use your name. 

Once he tricked you into revealing your name, he told the program to take that input (your 
name) and use it in place of the variable throughout the program. 

So how do you tell the computer that you want to replace a certain variable with a name or 
other input? One way is to use an INPUT statement. Here's how it works. The program asks a 



lie Page 32 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

question, like: 

10 PRINT WHAT'S YOUR NAME? 

The next line of the program is an INPUT statement that includes a variable, like: 

20 INPUT N$ 

(The dollar sign tells the program that the input will be a word. If the input will be a 

number, you leave the dollar sign off.) 

Try typing the first two lines of this little program: 

NEW 10 PRINT WHAT'S YOUR NAME? 2 INPUT N$ 

Now run the program and type a response to the question that appears on the screen. 

Type RUN 

The name you typed is now stored under the variable N$ . Watch what happens when you include 

the variable N$ in a PRINT statement later in the program. Type this: 

30 PRINT NICE TO MEET YOU N$ 

(Don't forget the space after YOU, and make sure that the variable N$ is outside the quotation 

marks . ) Then type 

40 END 

Now run the program. If all goes well, the program should ask you for your name, then use your 

name in place of the variable N$ , like this: 

WHAT'S YOUR NAME? ?NANCY NICE TO MEET YOU NANCY 

INPUT statements let you define variables from the keyboard. (In other words, the user's typed 
input becomes the value of the variable.) But sometimes you need to define a variable from 
within the program, as in the following example: 

NEW 10 PRINT HOW OLD ARE YOU? 2 INPUT A 30 LET D=A*365 40 PRINT THAT MAKES YOU 
APPROXIMATELY D 50 PRINT DAYS OLD! 60 END 

In this example, LET defines the variable D as the user's response to the question How old are 
you? times 365 the number of days in a year. (This simple program assumes everybody was born 
on January 1st. When you become more experienced at programming, you can calculate the exact 
number of days including extra days for leap years!) 

Feel free to type the age program and try it on your friends. (Don't forget to press Return at 
the end of each line.) For a challenge you might want to change it so it calculates a person's 
age in months instead of days! Don't forget to type NEW before you enter your new program. 

Naming Variables 

You can use single letters like A, D, and N$ as variables, or you can use whole words like AGE, 
DAYS, and NAME$. The advantage of using whole words is that it's easier to remember what they 
represent. The only drawback to using words as variables is that BASIC uses only the first two 
characters of a variable name to distinguish one variable from another. To BASIC, the variable 
DAYS is the same as the variable DARK, so be sure the first two characters of your variables 
are unique. 

BASIC Reserved Words: 

As you're writing programs that use variables, avoid the following words and abbreviations and 
any words that include these words, like LETTER. (They're either Applesoft BASIC commands or 
ProDOS commands. If you forget and use one of these commands as a variable by mistake, BASIC 
will try to use it as a command with unfortunate results. 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 33 of 74 





EXP 


LOG 


RND 


- 


FLASH 


LOMEM: 


ROT= 


ABS 


FLUSH 


MID$ 


RUN 


AND 


FN 


NEW 


SAVE 


APPEND 


FOR 


NEXT 


SCALE= 


ASC 


FP 


NORMAL 


SCRN( 


AT 


FRE 


NOT 


SHLOAD 


ATN 


GET 


NOTRACE 


SIN 


BLOAD 


GOSUB 


ON 


SPC{ 


BRUN 


GOTO 


ONERR 


SPEED= 


BSAVE 


GR 


OPEN 


SQR 


CALL 


HCOLOR= 


OR 


STEP 


CAT 


HGR 


PEL 


STOP 


CATALOG 


HGR2 


PEEK 


STORE 


CHAIN 


HIMEM: 


PLOT 


STR$ 


CHR$ 


HLIN 


POKE 


TAB( 


CLEAR 


HOME 


POP 


TAN 


CLOSE 


HPLOT 


POS 


TEXT 


COLOR= 


HTAB 


POSITION 


THEN 


CONT 


IF 


PREFIX 


TO 


COS 


IN# 


PRINT 


TRACE 


CREATE 


INPUT 


PR# 


UNLOCK 


DATA 


INT 


READ 


USR 


DEF 


INVERSE 


RECALL 


VAL 


DEL 


LEFT$ 


REM 


VLIN 


DELETE 


LEN 


RENAME 


VTAB 


DIM 


LET 


RESTORE 


WAIT 


DRAW 


LIST 


RESUME 


WRITE 


END 


LOAD 


RETURN 


XPLOT 


EXEC 


LOCK 


RIGHT$ 


XDRAW 



Don't worry if most of these commands are unfamiliar to you. You need to know only a handful 
of them to get a feel for programming in Applesoft BASIC. If you want to learn more, get the 
Applesoft Tutorial and the Applesoft BASIC Programmer's Reference Manual. 

Getting Ready to Save Programs on a Disk 

So far, you haven't lost a lot by erasing the programs you've written by typing NEW. But as 
you become more proficient, your programs will get much longer than the samples in this book. 
Before you go any farther, you'd better learn how to save your programs on a disk so you won't 
have to retype them every time you turn on the computer . 

Formatting 

As you learned in the last chapter, before you can save anything on a blank disk, you have to 
format it. Applesoft BASIC uses ProDOS, so stop what you're doing and format some disks using 
the formatting program on the ProDOS User's Disk. (The same disk you used to get into 
Applesoft BASIC -it's probably still in your disk drive.) 

Start up the ProDOS User's Disk. 



Or Restart: 

Use the OPEN-APPLE-CONTROL-RESET method if your 

lie is already turned on. 



Apple 



Press F (for PRODOS FILER) from the Main Menu. 



lie Page 34 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Press V (for VOLUME COMMANDS) from the Filer Menu. 

Press F (for FORMAT A VOLUME) from the Volume Commands Menu. 

The program wants to know the location of the disk you'll be formatting. You'll need to supply 
both the drive number (most likely 1 or 2 ) and the slot number (most likely 6). Slot refers to 
the slot inside the computer that contains your disk drive controller card. It will be slot 6 
if you followed the disk drive installation instructions in Chapter 1 of this manual. The 
number in parentheses on the display is a default setting (the programmer's calculated guess as 
to the information you'll supply). It's called a default setting because it will be used by 
default unless you supply an alternative. You can accept the default setting by pressing 
Return. You can change the default by typing over it. 

Important ! 

These instructions assume you have a DuoDisk or two disk drives. If you have a single disk 
drive, be sure to take your ProDOS User's Disk out of your disk drive and replace it with the 
disk you want formatted. 

Put the disk you want to format (a blank disk or a disk that contains information you no longer 
want) in drive 2. (If you have only one disk drive, take out the ProDOS User's Disk and 
replace it with the disk you want to format.) 

Press Return to accept the default (slot 6), or type a different slot number. 

Type 2 to change the default setting from drive 1 to drive 2 . 

Press Return to accept the default disk name. The default name will be /BLANKXX (where XX is a 
number between 00 and 99). If you have some other name in mind, just type over the default. 
Your disk name must start with a slash (but that's provided for you), then a letter. The rest 
of the name can be made up of letters, numbers or periods, but you can't use spaces or other 
punctuation, and the name can't be longer than 15 characters. Press Return when you finish 
typing the disk name. 

If you're formatting a previously formatted disk, you'll get a message like this: 

DESTROY '/XXX'? (Y/N) 

(where /XXX is the name of the disk you're about to reformat) If you knew you were about to 
format /XXX, and are willing to lose all the information stored on that disk, press Y (for yes) 
and the formatting will begin. 

If you don't want to destroy /XXX by reformatting it, press N (for no) and there's no damage 
done. 

If the disk you're formatting has never been formatted before, and all is well, you'll hear 
some whirring, then you'll see this message near the bottom of your screen: 

FORMAT COMPLETE 

Remove the formatted disk from the disk drive and label it with its new name and its operating 

system (ProDOS) . 

If something goes wrong during the format procedure, you'll see an error message. If you're 
not sure what the message means, or what to do about it, consult the error message appendix in 
the ProDOS User's Manual. 



He Page 35 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Saving a Program on a Disk 

Now that you've got a formatted disk, get back into the BASIC programming environment by 
restarting the ProDOS User's Disk and selecting option B (to accept Applesoft BASIC); then type 
the following program into memory as you did before: 

NEW 

10 PRINT HOW OLD ARE YOU? 2 INPUT A 30 LET D=A*365 40 PRINT THAT MAKES YOU D 50 PRINT DAYS 

OLD! 60 END 

To save this program, put your formatted disk in drive 1 and type SAVE, followed by the name 

you want to give your program. For example: 

SAVE AGE 

and press Return. 

If you want to save the program on a disk in drive 2, put your formatted disk in drive 2 and 

type 

SAVE AGE,D2 

and press Return. 

You'll know your program is being saved when you hear the appropriate disk drive whir. Once 
your program is stored safely on a disk, you can turn off your computer secure in the knowledge 
that your program is accessible to you anytime you want to amaze and astonish your 
non-programming friends . 

Naming Programs : 

You can name your program anything you want, within these guidelines: 

Maximum of 15 characters long. 

Must begin with a letter. 

Numbers, letters, periods (no other punctuation) permitted. 

No spaces permitted. 

Different operating systems and different application programs have slightly different (usually 
more liberal) rules, but if you follow these, you can't go wrong. 

Running Your Program 

When you want to use a program that's stored on a disk, all you have to do is start up the 
ProDOS User's Disk and select the Applesoft BASIC option, put the disk that contains your 
program in drive 1, then type RUN AGE (or whatever you named your program). 

If you want to run a program from a disk in drive 2, type 

RUN AGE,D2 

and your program is off and running. 

If you want to load a program into memory but don't yet want to run it, type LOAD, and then the 
name of the program. 

Cataloging a Disk 

After you've written and saved several programs on a disk, you may have trouble remembering 



lie Page 36 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

what you named each of them. If you find that you've forgotten the names of the programs on 
your disk, type CAT (or CAT,D2 if the disk is in drive 2). 

You'll see a display like this that tells you, among other things, the name of the programs on 
the disk and how much space they take up on the disk. 

Typical Catalog 

/MYPROGRAMS 

NAME TYPE BLOCKS MODIFIED 

PUZZLE BAS 4 <N0 DATE> AGE BAS 1 <N0 DATE> PRACTICE 

BAS 11 <N0 DATE> PAZAZZ BAS 14 <N0 DATE> RAIN BAS 6 

<N0 DATE> 

BLOCKS FREE: 208 BLOCKS USED: 72 
] 

Creating a Self-Starting Program 

Programs that you buy don't require you to type RUN. They just start running when you put the 
program disk in the disk drive and turn on the power. 

If you'd like a program you've written to be a self-starter, you can make it self-starting by 
following these steps: 

Format a disk (for ProDOS) 

Copy the files PRODOS and BASIC. SYSTEM from the ProDOS User's Disk. (You'll find instructions 
for copying files in the ProDOS User's Manual that came with your disk drive.) 

Copy your program onto the disk and give it the name STARTUP. 

Starting up this disk loads ProDOS, puts you into BASIC, and runs your program. 

It ' s Your Turn 

This section presents two sample programs along with complete explanations of how they work. 

Converting Miles to Kilometers 

Here's a program that converts miles to kilometers. 

Program Line Explanation 

10 PRINT THIS PROGRAM CONVERTS 20 PRINT MILES TO KILOMETERS. Describes what the program 

does. 

30 PRINT HOW MANY MILES 4 PRINT DID YOU TRAVEL Prints your request for information. The 

semicolon instructs the computer to leave the cursor on the current line rather than move it to 

the next line. 

50 INPUT MILE Puts ? on the screen. Whatever number you type is stored in a variable named 

MILE. Note that because of the semicolon in line 40, the question mark appears on the same 

line as the question. 

60 LET KILO = MILE/. 62137 Creates a variable named KILO, which is equal to MILE (the number 

you enter) divided by .62137. 

70 PRINT YOU TRAVELED KILO; 80 PRINT KILOMETERS. Prints what's inside the first set of 

quotation marks, then prints the value of KILO, then prints what's inside the quotation marks 

in line 80. 



lie Page 37 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

90 END Signals the end of the program. 

Once you've typed the program, you can try it by typing: 

RUN 

Here's what you'll see: 

THIS PROGRAM CONVERTS MILES TO KILOMETERS. HOW MANY MILES DID YOU TRAVEL? 3 YOU TRAVELED 
4.82804127 KILOMETERS. 

Spacing? 

If the spacing on your screen isn't exactly right, you may have forgotten to type a space 
inside one of the PRINT statements. To retype a line, type the line number of the line you 
want to correct, then type the new statement. 

You can save this program on your newly formatted disk by typing SAVE followed by a name, like 
KILO. Then, when you want to load the program, simply type RUN KILO. 

Write Your Own Conversion Programs: 

You can use PRINT and INPUT statements (and this program as a guide) to write programs that 
convert any measurement you can think of (as long as you know the conversion formula). Try 
Celcius to Fahrenheit or inches to millimeters. 

Crazy Sentences 

This program uses INPUT statements to create a silly story. Each time you run the program, the 
sentence the program creates will be a little different (unless you always type the same 
responses) . 

Don't Forget to Clear Memory: 

Before you try another program, don't forget to clear the computer's memory by typing NEW. 

Program Line Explanation 

10 PRINT COLOR Prints a request for a color, the semicolon tells 

the computer not to go on to the next line. 

20 INPUT Cl$ Displays ? on the screen. Whatever color you type 

is stored in the variable Cl$ (pronounced 
see-one-dollar's). The word color cannot be used as 
a variable name because it's an Applesoft BASIC 
reserved word. 

30 PRINT ANOTHER COLOR Prints a request for a second color. 

4 INPUT C2$ Displays ? on the screen. Whatever color you type 

is stored in the variable C2$. 

50 PRINT NAME Prints a request for a name. 

60 INPUT Nl$ Displays ? on the screen. Whatever name you type is 

stored in the variable Nl$. 

70 PRINT ANOTHER NAME Prints a request for a second name. 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 38 of 74 



80 INPUT N2$ 



Displays ? on the screen. Whatever name you type is 
stored in variable N2$. 



90 PRINT 

100 PRINT THE Cl$; 



Prints a blank line. 

ROBOT 110 PRINT WITH THE C2$; EYES 120 PRINT 
GRABBED Nl$; WHILE 130 PRINT N2$; RAN FOR HELP. 
Prints what's inside the quotation marks 
interspersed with the colors and names you assigned 
to the variables . 



140 END 



Signals the end of the program. 



After you type RUN, your display will look something like this: 

COLOR? GREEN ANOTHER COLOR? PURPLE NAME? ROY ANOTHER NAME? HEATHER 

THE GREEN ROBOT WITH THE PURPLE EYES GRABBED ROY WHILE HEATHER RAN FOR HELP. 



You can use this same program to create your own sentences, 
program that creates a whole story. 



In fact, you may want to write a 



Important ! 

When you choose variable names, be sure that you don't choose a word that is an Applesoft BASIC 
reserved word. Not even part of a variable can be a reserved word. For example, a variable 
can't be named LETTER because the reserved word LET is part of the name. 

Reserved words are listed earlier in this chapter. 

And don't forget the two-character rule: Applesoft BASIC looks at only the first two 
characters of a variable name. If in the Crazy Sentence program the variables were named 
NAME1$ and NAME2$, Applesoft BASIC would have created only one variable. 

Printing Your Programs on Paper 

If you have a printer connected to your computer, you can print a copy of your program on paper 
using the LIST command. This is useful in debugging programs. 

Here ' s how: 



Turn on your printer. 

Type PR#1 to direct all information to your printer. 

Type LIST 

Type PR#0 to send information back to the screen instead of to the printer. 

PR What? 

PR#1 is shorthand for print to the device attached to slot 1. 

You ' ve Only Begun to Program 

Now that you've made your way through this chapter, you know enough to write a few simple BASIC 
programs. To go further with Applesoft BASIC, ask your Apple dealer for the Applesoft 
Tutorial. It's a gentle introduction to BASIC that shows you how to write programs that 
produce animated color graphics, in addition to programs like the ones in this chapter that 
manipulate words and numbers. From there, you can graduate to the Applesoft BASIC Programmer's 
Reference Manual, a two-volume set that is the BASIC programmer's primary source of information 
on the Applesoft BASIC programming language. 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 39 of 74 



Using the Computer as a Calculator 

When you're in the BASIC programming environment, you can use your Apple lie as a calculator. 

Try it; type this: 

PRINT 2+2 

and press Return. 

If all went well, you should see the result of the calculation under your print statement, like 

this : 

PRINT 2+2 4 

You don ' t have to preface your PRINT statement with a line number because you don ' t want to use 
the calculation in a program you just want to print the results of the calculation on the 
screen. 

Here are the Applesoft BASIC equivalents of the addition, subtraction, multiplication and 
division symbols and some sample calculations. Practice using these symbols now (and any time 
you need to do some calculations and don't have your pocket calculator handy). Don't forget to 
start your calculation with the word PRINT. 



+ addition - 
PRINT 5+2 7 
PRINT 5-2 3 
PRINT 5*2 10 
PRINT 5/2 2.5 



subtraction * multiplication / division 



More Elaborate Calculations: 

You can combine several calculations in one PRINT statement. Use parentheses to indicate which 
calculations you want performed first. For example: (9+4)*3. Without quotation marks, the 
result of the calculation would be 21. With quotation marks, the result is 39. 

A Shortcut: 

If you like, you can use a question mark (?) in place of the word PRINT. For example, you can 
type ? 2+2 instead of PRINT 2+2. Either way, you'll get 4 as a result. 

Quick Calculations: 

If you ever just want to use your Apple lie for some quick calculations, you don't have to go 
to the trouble of starting up the ProDOS User's Disk. All you have to do is start up the Apple 
lie without a disk in drive 1, press CONTROL-RESET to turn off the disk drive, and start typing 
your calculations . 

Don't use this way of getting into BASIC if you plan on writing and saving a program! Starting 
up without a disk in drive 1 and pressing CONTROL-RESET gets you into BASIC, but it doesn't 
load ProDOS, and without an operating system, your computer doesn't know how to communicate 
with your disk drive. 



Other Computer Languages 



BASIC is just one of the programming languages available for the Apple lie. The following 
sections briefly introduce a few other popular computer languages available for the Apple lie. 
Your Apple dealer will be able to suggest particular packages and manuals for each programming 
language. 



lie Page 40 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Logo 

Logo is a programming language that is especially suited to children and beginning programmers 
of any age because it's great for creating computer graphics. Using simple commands like 
FORWARD, LEFT, and RIGHT, you learn to write programs that produce elaborate and colorful 
geometric designs. Logo encourages you to learn by trial and error because mistakes are so 
painless. If you make a mistake, the worst that can happen is that you'll get a geometric 
design other than the one you intended, and half the time the result is better than your 
original plan. But Logo does more than let you create graphics. You can use it for fun or for 
serious applications . 

Pascal 

Named after Blaise Pascal, a 17th-century philosopher and mathematician, this language is used 
in high school and college computer classes to teach programming because it stresses a 
systematic approach to programming. You break programming problems down into tasks and 
subtasks, and then write your program in manageable-sized chunks. 

6502 Assembly Language 

This language is one small step up from the language of electrical impulses that is the native 
tongue of the Apple lie. It's a lot harder to learn than languages like Logo and BASIC that 
use English-like commands, but it gives you faster programs because it doesn't need as much 
translation for the computer to understand it, and it gives you more control over the operation 
of the computer. 

Other Languages 

Ask your dealer for information on other programming languages available for the Apple lie such 
as like COBOL, FORTRAN, SuperPILOT, FORTH, C, PL/1, LISP, Modula-2. 

Chapter 5 Summary 

Writing a computer program involves breaking a task down into small steps and expressing those 
steps in terms the computer can understand. 

Popular Programming Languages 

Logo: Easy and fun to learn (with lots of emphasis on graphics), yet powerful enough for 
serious programming. 

BASIC: Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code is built into the Apple lie and many 
other personal computers, so there are lots of people who speak the same language. BASIC is 
good for beginners because it resembles English and is easy to learn. 

Computer as Calculator 

Because BASIC is built into the Apple lie, you can use your computer as a calculator. (To get 
into the BASIC environment quickly, press CONTROL-RESET after starting up your Apple lie 
without a disk in the built in disk drive.) Here are the mathematical symbols the computer 
understands : 

+ addition - subtraction * multiplication /division 

Some BASIC Vocabulary 



lie Page 41 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

PRINT: Displays information on the screen. 

INPUT: Lets you interact with someone using your program. 

LET: Defines a variable. 

END: Tells the computer the program is finished. 

NEW: Erases whatever is in memory. 

HOME: Erases whatever is on the screen. 

LIST: Displays the program in memory. 

RUN: Executes the program in memory. 

CAT: Short for catalog. Displays a list of what's on a disk. 

SAVE: Stores your program in a file on a disk. 

LOAD: Transfers a copy of a program on a disk into memory. 

ProDOS Commands : 

SAVE, LOAD, and CAT are ProDOS operating system commands that you'll use when you're writing 

BASIC programs. 

Adding to Your System 

Just as there are all sorts of application programs you can get for your computer, there are 
dozens of peripheral devices that can make your computer more useful. The following sections 
give you an idea of typical system configurations for school, home, and office use. 

Different Configurations 

Read about the configuration that best applies to you. If you want to know more about any of 
the peripheral devices mentioned, you'll find sections later in this chapter that describe each 
peripheral device in detail. 

School Configuration 

A typical school configuration might consist of an Apple lie, a monitor, a disk drive, and a 
mouse. 

A color monitor is ideal for schools because most educational software uses color to engage and 
hold students' attention, but it's not a requirement software will run just fine on a 
television set or a monochrome monitor. 

For many applications, a single disk drive is inadequate because you spend a lot of time 
exchanging your program disk for your data disk, but it's not a problem with most educational 
software because students can use the educational programs for drill and practice without 
saving their work on a disk. 

While it's not a requirement for most educational software, a mouse is a desirable peripheral 
device for school systems because mouse-based programs are easier to learn and more intuitive 
than keyboard-based programs . 

Computer Networks 



lie Page 42 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

To save money, and to keep track of who's doing what at which computer, many computer 
classrooms link a number of Apple lie's into a computer network. A network allows a class full 
of students with Apple lie's to share the disk drives and printer at the instructor's computer. 
With many networks, the instructor can control which programs, lessons, and tests each student 
receives, view any student's work, and send messages to individual students over the 
wire.” 

About Kids and Computers : 

Most kids are fearless about computers and think nothing of popping the top of the Apple lie 
and rearranging the circuitry just to see what will happen. To discourage these overzealous 
hackers, there are screw holes on the Apple lie cover so classroom computers can be bolted 
shut. 

Home Configuration 

A typical home system might consist of an Apple lie, a monitor or TV set, a DuoDisk, a mouse, a 
thermal or dot matrix printer, and a joystick. 

This gives you all the equipment you need to do word processing, home finance, and other 
serious home applications. By attaching an RF modulator to your color television, you can swap 
your monitor for your TV when you want to play computer games or use educational programs that 
are more fun and effective in color. 

Add a modem to your system if you want to use your computer for home banking, and other 
applications that involve communicating with other computers over the telephone lines . 



Business Configuration 

A typical office system might consist of an Apple lie, a monitor, a DuoDisk, a ProFile, a daisy 
wheel printer, a mouse, a modem, and one or more specialized cards. 

Office applications, especially accounting and data base programs, involve a staggering amount 
of data. A mass-storage device, like the ProFile, can store the equivalent of dozens of floppy 
disks and save you a lot of disk swapping. 

If you plan on doing a lot of charts and graphs for reports and presentations, you might 
consider an RGB monitor instead of, or in addition to, a monochrome monitor. An RGB monitor 
can give you color without sacrificing the resolution you need for word processing and other 
business applications. 

A daisy wheel printer is a must if you need professional-quality correspondence. If you don't 
need that level of perfection, you could get by with the faster, more versatile dot matrix 
printer, which can produce a variety of type fonts and graphics. 

A modem enables you to tap into information services for stock quotes and business news, and to 
exchange information with colleagues across the hall or across the country. 

Peripheral Devices 

This section describes the most popular Apple lie peripheral devices. But it is not a 
comprehensive list of the devices available for the Apple lie. Flip through any computer 
magazine, and you'll see ads for music synthesizers and articles about people who use Apples to 



lie Page 43 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

control everything from sprinkler systems to coffee makers. 

Monitor 

There are two general types of monitors : monochrome monitors and color monitors . Monochrome 
monitors come in three varieties: black and white, black and green, and black and amber. Some 
studies show that an amber display is easier on the eyes; some studies show that a green 
display is easier to read; some people simply prefer black and white because it more closely 
resembles a typewritten page. The best choice is the one that looks best to you. 

Color monitors cost more than monochrome monitors, but they're ideal for computer graphics and 
for displaying business charts and graphs. Unfortunately, some color monitors aren't very good 
at displaying text. If you need a color monitor that can double as a text display, ask your 
Apple dealer about RGB color monitors. RGB monitors have better resolution (a sharper picture) 
than other types of color monitor. 

Using Your Television as a Display Device 

It is possible to use a standard television set (with an RF modulator) as a display device for 
the Apple lie, but if you plan to use your computer for word processing, financial planning, or 
other business applications, make sure the program you get is designed for a 40-column display. 
Some business applications require an 80-column display. 

Televisions can't display 80 characters per line clearly, the way monitors can. They can 
display only 40 characters per line. While 40 characters per line is fine for some 
applications (games and educational programs), many find it too narrow for business letters or 
electronic spreadsheets . 

Printer 

A printer creates a paper copy of information you create with your computer. You can use a 
computer without a printer, but it's not convenient or practical, for example, to mail your 
letters on disks. For some people, a printer is a must. 

Printers come in a variety of prices and vary accordingly in print speed, quality, and 
loudness. The most common types of printer are thermal transfer, dot matrix, and daisy wheel. 

Thermal Printers 

Thermal printers essentially burn characters onto paper. They are inexpensive and very quiet. 
The print quality varies dramatically among different kinds of thermal printers. Some are good 
enough for correspondence; others are suitable only for drafts and inter-office memos. Most 
thermal printers require either specially treated paper or specially treated ribbon. Check the 
prices of these accessories before deciding on what kind of printer to get. 

Dot Matrix Printers 

Dot matrix printers form characters with patterns of dots. They're fast, economical, ideal for 
graphics, and fine for drafts, memos, and personal letters. Because of the way they form 
characters, dot matrix printers can produce a wide variety of type sizes and typefaces 
(boldface, italic, and so on) so you can create headlines and other special effects. 

The only drawback to dot matrix printers is that with some dot matrix printers you can see the 
pattern of dots that make up each character. This can give your documents a look that people 
associate with computer printouts. If you need a printer that can produce professional, 
letter-quality documents, you may need a daisy wheel printer. But check the quality of the dot 
matrix printer before you decide you may not be able to tell the difference between text 



lie Page 44 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

produced with a good dot matrix printer and text produced with a daisy wheel printer. 

Daisy Wheel Printers 

Daisy wheel printers, also known as letter quality printers, are essentially high speed, high 
quality typewriters. They are slower and more expensive than dot matrix or thermal printers, 
but if the appearance of your correspondence is important, a daisy wheel printer may be a 
necessity. Most daisy wheel printers use a circular print wheel (they look something like a 
daisy) to produce fully formed characters. 

Choosing a Printer 

Whether you decide on a thermal, dot matrix, or daisy wheel printer, make sure the printer you 
buy works with an Apple lie get a demonstration, preferrably with the programs you'll be using 
before you leave the store. 

You should also ask your dealer how to attach the printer to your Apple lie and to help you set 
the switches on the printer interface card. The switches control things like the speed at which 
information is sent from the computer to the printer, the way in which information is sent to 
the printer, and whether the computer, the application program, or the printer generates things 
like carriage returns . 

Don't rely on the printer manual! Printers are designed to work with a wide variety of 
computers and an even wider variety of application programs, so printer manuals are necessarily 
vague ask your dealer for specifics on how to make your printer work with your Apple lie and 
the application program you have. 

Another consideration in choosing a printer is the type of paper you'll use. Most printers give 
you a choice of using pin-feed paper or single-sheet paper. The advantage of using pin-feed 
paper, which comes in a stack of attached, perforated sheets, is that you can leave the printer 
unattended while it prints 20, 30, and 40-page documents. The advantage of using single-sheet 
paper is that you can print on company letterhead, personal stationery, or anything else. 

Serial or Parallel Interface 

When you're shopping for printers, you'll hear the phrases serial interface and parallel 
interface. These terms refer to the way information is sent from the computer to the printer. 
With serial printers, the computer sends information one bit at a time. With parallel 
printers, the computer sends information eight bits at a time. 

You ' d think that sending information eight bits at a time would be eight times faster than 
sending information one bit at a time, but either mode of transmission is faster than most 
printers can print, so speed shouldn't be a consideration in whether you get a serial or a 
parallel printer. Decide on the printer you want, then get the appropriate interface card to 
connect it to your Apple lie. If you get a serial printer, get a serial interface card. If 
you get a parallel printer, get a parallel interface card. (Don't assume that the interface 
card comes with the printer.) 

Apple Devices are Serial: 

All of the Apple devices discussed in this section are serial devices. 

Plotter 

Plotters can reproduce graphs, charts, floor plans, and other graphics you create with your 
computer . 



lie Page 45 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

For students, a plotter can reproduce drawings and geometric designs created with the 
programming language Logo. For businessmen, a plotter can reproduce graphs and charts created 
with business graphics software for use in reports and presentations. For engineers and 
architects, a plotter can reproduce the three-dimensional drawings created with CAD 
(computer-aided design) software for designing cars, circuit boards, buildings, and any other 
kind of product. 

Disk Drives 

You must have at least one disk drive to use your computer for anything but simple BASIC 
programming. And it's convenient to have a second disk drive so that you can keep your 
application program disk in drive 1 and your data disk in drive 2. (A few programs require you 
to have two disk drives.) If you have an Apple DuoDisk attached to your Apple lie, you have 
two disk drives in one case. The drive on the left is drive 1; the drive on the right is drive 
2. 

Having two disk drives also makes it easier to make copies of data disks a must, since disks 
are perishable. 

You can attach up to six disk drives to your Apple lie (but four is the maximum recommended) . 
The more disk drives you have, the more information is accessible to the computer (when 
information is accessible to the computer it's said to be on-line). But if you need to work 
with a lot of information at one time, you should consider getting a mass storage device, like 
the ProFile. 

Tape Storage: 

Before disk drives were available for the Apple II, programs had to be loaded from and saved 
onto cassette tape using a standard tape recorder. It's slow and complicated, compared to 
saving and loading from disks, but it's still possible to use cassette tape for storage. 
(You'll notice that there are input and output jacks with cassette icons on the back panel of 
your Apple lie.) If you want to use tape for storage, ask your dealer for details or read the 
relevant sections in the Apple lie Technical Reference Manual. 

ProFile 

If you plan to use your Apple lie for data base applications or other applications that involve 
large amounts of data, you might want to invest in a mass storage device like the Apple 
ProFile. The ProFile can store the equivalent of dozens of floppy disks. It's a fast and 
convenient way to get at your data. The ProFile stores all of your data on a pair of hard 
disks sealed inside a box that sits neatly on top of your computer. 

In addition to storing your data on a ProFile, you can get a program manager, like Catalyst 
from Quark, that lets you store your application programs on the ProFile and access them from a 
menu. Once your application programs are on the ProFile, you can switch from program to 
program by selecting from the program manager ' s menu rather than by swapping program disks and 
restarting the computer. 

Mouse 

The mouse is a tool for communicating with the computer. When you move the mouse across your 
desktop, a pointer moves in a corresponding direction across the screen. You can use the mouse 
to move chunks of text from one place in a document to another, to select from lists, and to 
create charts and other graphics. 

Before the mouse came along, the main way to communicate with a computer program was by typing 
commands at the keyboard. The mouse lets you communicate with programs in a more intuitive 



lie Page 46 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

way, so mouse-driven programs tend to be quicker to master and easier to use. 
Here are some terms, techniques, and characteristics of mouse-driven programs: 

Clicking: Pressing the button on top of the mouse is called clicking. Many programs let you 
select from a list of options by moving the pointer to an option and clicking on it. 

Dragging: You can move paragraphs or drawings by pointing to what you want to move and holding 
the mouse button down while you move the pointer to the new location. This is called dragging. 

Pull-down Menus: Programs that use the mouse generally have a menu bar that stretches across 
the top of the display. Hidden inside that bar are menu items (lists of options). To see what 
your options are, you point to one of the menu titles on the menu bar and hold down the mouse 
button. This reveals a pull-down menu. Point to the option you want and release the button. 



Anything else you need to know about using the mouse will be explained in the manual supplied 
with the application program. Keep in mind that not all programs use the mouse. 

Modem 

A modem, short for MODulator/DEModulator , links your computer by telephone to other computers 
and information services. If you plan to tap into your company's mainframe computer, access a 
large computer library for stock quotes, medical, or legal research, or use your computer for 
electronic banking, you'll need a modem and a communications program like Apple Access II. 

Different modems send and receive information at different speeds. The speed is measured in 
bits per second (bps), often referred to as baud. One common baud rate is 300. You can also 
get modems for your Apple lie that send and receive data at 1200 baud. 1200 baud modems cost 
more, but they're four times faster than 300 baud modems a valid consideration because you're 
often paying long distance phone rates. 

Keypad 

If you're used to working with an adding machine or calculator and will be spending a lot of 
time entering numeric data, you might want to add a numeric keypad to your computer system. 

The number keys on the numeric keypad generate the same characters as their counterparts on the 
top row of the Apple lie keyboard, but most adding-machine touch-typists prefer using the keys 
on the keypad to using the spread-out keys on the keyboard. 

Joystick or Hand Controls 

If you plan to use your computer for games and who doesn't occasionally you'll want to invest 
in a joystick or hand controls. Not all games require a joystick or hand controls, but the 
majority do. 

Hand controls and joysticks control the movement of creatures or objects in game programs. 
With hand controls, you control movement by turning a pair of knobs one in each hand. With a 
joystick, you maneuver an airplane-style joystick. Both hand controls and joysticks have 
buttons you press to fire torpedos, throw forward passes, or anything else the programmer can 
dream up . 

Adding Memory 



lie Page 47 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

In an industry as dynamic as the personal computer industry, it's inevitable that computers 
will be built with more and more memory. It's equally inevitable that newer, faster, more 
powerful software will be written to take advantage of that extra memory. Where does that 
leave you? 

It leaves you in great shape, because the Apple lie is designed to grow as technology grows. 
You can add memory to your Apple lie right now by adding an extended 80-column card. 

Adding a Co-processor 

A co-processor is a microprocessor that works with or overrides the microprocessor that comes 
with your machine. The main reason you'd get one is to take advantage of software developed 
for other computers software that wouldn't otherwise work on your Apple lie. 

The most popular co-processor for the Apple lie is the Z80 processor, which lets you run 
programs based on the CP/M® operating system. 

By plugging a Z80 card into your Apple lie, you can select from over 20,000 CP/M-based 
programs, many of them free (public domain) programs. 

Ask your dealer for information on other co-processors that let you take advantage of 
MS-DOS-based programs, and co-processor cards that increase the speed or enhance the graphics 
of Apple lie programs. 

Other Peripherals 

One of the secrets of the Apple II ' s success is its open architecture. There's hardly any limit 

to the number and variety of gadgets that you can attach to the Apple lie to make it a more 

powerful, productive, or playful machine. 

Here's a small sample of the more exotic peripherals that you could add to your computer 

system: 

Clock Card: Makes it possible for programs, for example, to record the date and time a given 
file was last revised. With a clock card and home control devices, you can program your Apple 
lie to turn lights and kitchen appliances on and off. With a clock card and communications 
software, you can communicate with an information service at times you specify to take 
advantage of cheaper telephone rates . 

Accelerator Card: Makes most programs run almost four times faster than normal. It's 
especially useful for spreadsheet and other number-crunching applications. 

Print Buffer Card: Lets your Apple lie send an entire file to your printer at one time so you 
can use your computer for other things while the file is being printed. The buffer card plugs 
into your printer interface card. 

Voice Input Device: Lets you communicate with certain programs by using verbal commands rather 
than typed commands. Like the mouse, it's an intuitive way to communicate with computer 
programs . 

Synthesizer: A peripheral device that can simulate a variety of musical instruments ranging 
from woodwinds to percussion. Using special software, you can compose and orchestrate your own 
music . 

Home Control Devices: Peripheral devices that can work with your Apple lie to control the 
temperature of your home; turn your lamps, sprinklers, coffee maker, and other appliances on 
and off; and monitor your smoke and burgler alarms. 



lie Page 48 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

RAM Card: Lets you expand the memory capacity of your Apple lie far beyond 128K to take 
advantage of even faster, more sophisticated, and more functional application programs. 

Chapter 6 Summary 

Popular Peripheral Devices 

Monitor Displays instructions from the program to you, and shows you what 
you ' ve typed into memory . 

Printer Produces a paper copy of information you create with the computer. 

Plotter Draws a paper copy of the graphics you create with the computer. 

Disk Drive Writes information on disks and reads information from disks. 

Modem Links your computer to other computers and information services by 
phone. 

Mouse Lets you create graphics, select from lists, move chunks of data and 
otherwise communicate with the computer without using the keyboard. 

Keypad Duplicates the number keys on the keyboard in an adding machine 
layout. 

Joystick Move objects and creatures around the screen. 

ProFile Stores the equivalent of dozens of floppy disks. 

Text Card Gives you an 80-character-per-line display instead of the standard 
40-character-per-line display. 

Memory Card Adds additional RAM to your Apple lie. 



Chapter 7-Conclusion 

This manual was designed to get you started to give you an idea of how your computer works, and 
how you can put the computer to work in your classroom, home, or office. Where you go from 
here is up to you. 

You may want to learn to use your computer for budgeting or home banking. You may want to learn 
more about the computer by writing programs of your own. One thing's for sure, your learning 
won't end with this manual because there is no limit to what you can do with your Apple lie. 

It's impossible to tell you everything there is to know about using the Apple lie because 
computers are chameleons. How they work is colored by the program you're using, just as the 
sound that comes out of your stereo speakers depends on the record you put on the turntable. 

So don't expect to learn everything about operating the Apple lie at one sitting. Learn what 
you need to use a given application, and appreciate the incredible flexibility of a machine 
that can be a typewriter one minute and a flight simulator the next. 

Computer Confidence 

The secret to a good relationship with your computer is confidence. If you live in constant 



lie Page 49 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

fear of pressing the wrong key and losing data, you'll have a hard time divorcing yourself from 
pencil and paper. 

And the secret to computer confidence is file management knowing how to get at your data, 
knowing how to make copies of your data. If the application programs you use don't have data 
management utilities like catalog, copy, and format, you must get a utilities disk that works 
with your application program and learn to use it. 

You'll find ProDOS utilities like format, copy, and catalog on the ProDOS User's Disk packed 
with Apple disk drives. If you don't have an Apple disk drive, ask your Apple dealer to help 
you select the utilities disk that is right for your application programs. 

So Long 

As you build your software library and add peripheral devices to your computer system, you'll 
occasionally hit stumbling blocks. Where can you turn? This book is a good place to start. 
If you can't find the answer here, talk to your dealer. He's the best source of information on 
the Apple II family of computers. 

From here on out, the best teacher is experience. You won't really know what you know, or what 
you don't know, until you start using an application program. Your most unforgettable lessons 
will come from trial and error. Whatever you do, don't be afraid to experiment. 

Enjoy your computer. 

Glossary 

accelerator card: A circuit board you can add to your Apple lie to make most software run up 
to four times faster. 

accounting software: A type of application program that lets you keep track of accounts 
payable, accounts receivable, inventory, and so on. 

accessory: Another word for peripheral device something you attach to the computer (like a 
printer or a joystick) to make it a more powerful or playful machine. 

address: A location in the computer's memory. 

Apple II: A family of computers. The granddaddy of the family, the Apple I, was invented in a 
garage in California. 

Apple lie Reference Manual: A manual containing detailed descriptions of all the hardware and 
firmware that make up the Apple lie. It's designed both for programmers and peripheral-card 
designers, but not for newcomers to computers. 

AppleCare: Apple's fixed-cost, carry-in service plan. 

Applesoft BASIC: The Apple II dialect of the BASIC programming language. See BASIC. 

application program: Software designed for a particular purpose (such as home finance, 
education, word processing) . 

arrow keys: The keys in the lower-right corner of the Apple lie keyboard that control the 
movement of the cursor in most programs . 

ASCII: Acronym for American Standard Code for Information Interchange. It's a communications 



lie Page 50 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

code that defines the representation of letters, numbers, and punctuation marks. 

assembly language: A programming language that is very close to the language of electrical 
impulses that is the Apple lie's native tongue. Because assembly language programs require 
very little translation, they can be very fast, and are therefore ideal for arcade-style 
computer games and other applications in which speed is a factor. 

AUX. CONNECTOR: A slot inside the Apple lie for cards that increase the memory or enhance the 
video capabilities of the computer. 

back panel: The rear panel of the computer case. 

backspace: To move the cursor to the left. 

baud: A designation for how fast peripheral devices can send and receive information. 

BBS: See bulletin board system. 

BASIC: Short for Beginners All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code. The most popular computer 
language for personal computers. It's built in to your Apple lie. 

binary: A numbering system where every number is expressed as a combination of zeros and ones. 
It's a numbering system perfectly suited to computers because the computer's brain is made up 
of switches like light switches that can either be on or off. On is often represented as the 
number 1. Off is represented as the number 0. 

bit: The smallest item of useful information a computer can handle. Usually represented as a 
one or a zero. Eight bits equals one byte. 

bits per second: (Abbreviated bps . ) A designation for how fast peripherals can send and 
receive information. 

bps: See bits per second. 

boot: Another way to say start up your application program. 

bug: An error. The expression comes from the early days of computing when a moth flew into a 
room-size computer and caused a breakdown. 

bug-ridden: Full of bugs. 

bulletin board system: Abbreviated BBS. A computerized version of the bulletin boards 
frequently found in grocery stores and laudermats places to leave messages, and to advertise 
things you want to buy or sell. One thing you get from a computerized bulletin board that you 
can't get from a cork board is free software. See public domain software. 

business graphics: Programs that let you analyze numerical information in a visual way. 

button: The raised area on top of the mouse that you press when you want to select from a menu 
or perform other activities in mouse-based programs . 

byte: A sequence of eight bits that represent an instruction, a letter, a number, or a 
punctuation mark. 

C: A programming language used with the popular UNIX operating system. 

CAD: See computer-aided design. 



lie Page 51 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

CAI : See computer-aided instruction. 

Caps Lock: A key that you can lock into place so that subsequent letters you type will come 
out capitalized. Caps Lock doesn't affect non-alphabet keys. 

card: A circuit board that you can plug into a slot inside the Apple lie to expand the 
computer's memory, enhance its video capabilities, or give it the means to communicate with a 
peripheral device like a printer or a modem. 

CAT: A ProDOS command that you can use to examine the contents of a disk. CAT is short for 
catalog. 

catalog: A list of all the files on a disk. Sometimes called a directory. 

Catalyst: A program manager produced by Quark. 

characters: Letters, numbers, and other symbols used to communicate with a computer. 

character generator ROM: The integrated circuit responsible for printing characters on the 
screen. 

chip: A small wafer containing thousands of microscopic components. 

circuit board: A collection of integrated circuits (chips) on a board. 

click: The act of pressing the mouse button. You click the mouse when you want to select 
something from a list in a mouse-driven program. 

clock card: An interface card that keeps time. A clock card can work with software to control 
when files are sent to a remote computer, when a given appliance is turned on or off, and it 
can mark the time and date a file was last revised. 

COBOL: An acronym for Common Business Oriented Language. A business-oriented programming 
language especially suited to applications involving large amounts of data. 

code: To write a program. Can also refer to the lines of the program. 

column: A way of designating the width of the computer's display. A column is one character 
wide. The standard Apple lie can display 40 columns of characters. An Apple lie with an 
80-column text card can display 80 columns of characters. 

command: A word or character that causes the computer to do something. 

communications software: Programs that make it possible to exchange information with other 
computers . 

compiler: A computer program that translates a language, such as Pascal, into a language the 
computer can understand. A compiler translates the entire program just once. Compare 
interpreter. 

computer: A machine that processes words and numbers faster than a food processor can slice 
potatoes. Not particularly creative or intuitive, but very good at repetitious tasks. 

computer-aided design: Software for creating three-dimensional drawings. 

computer-aided instruction: Learning something (math, history, home economics, or anything 
else) with the help of a computer program. 



lie Page 52 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

computer system: A collective term for the Apple lie and everything attached to it. 

configuration: See computer system. 

connect time: The amount of time you spend accessing an information service. 

contrast knob: A dial on your video monitor that lets you adjust the brightness on the screen. 

CONTROL: A key on the Apple keyboard that when pressed in conjunction with another key makes 
that other key behave differently. It controls the operation of other keys. 

controller card: An interface card that tells your Apple lie how to work with one or two disk 
drives . 

co-processor: A microprocessor on a card that overrides or works with the microprocessor on 
the main circuit board. 

copy protect: To prevent someone from duplicating the contents of a disk. Compare write 
protect. 

courseware: Educational software. 

CP/M: An acronym for Control Program for Microprocessors. An operating system that works with 
the Z80 microprocessor. 

cursor: A blinking underline, rectangle, or other symbol that marks your place on the screen. 

daisy wheel printer: A type of printer that produces professional, letter quality 
correspondence . 

data: Information, especially raw or unprocessed information. 

data base: A type of application program that helps you keep track of lists of information. 
Makes it easy to recall, update, and cross reference information. (Also known as data 
management . ) 

data bits: The computer sends and receives information as a string of bits. These are called 
data bits. 

data disk: A disk containing your work letters, budgets, pictures, and so on. 

data management: See data base. 

default: A recommended response to a question in a program. The response will be used by 
default unless you supply an alternative. 

DELETE: A key that you can press (in some programs) to erase the character to the left of the 
cursor. 

destination volume: The disk you're copying to. Compare source volume. 

device: Short for peripheral device. A machine attached to your computer, such as a printer or 
a modem. 

directory: A list of all the files on a disk. Sometimes called a catalog. 



lie Page 53 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

disk: A circle of flexible plastic coated with iron oxide (the same sort of thing they make 
cassette tape out of). You can buy programs pre-recorded on disks, and you save your work on 
blank disks. 

disk controller card: A circuit board that provides a connection between the Apple lie and one 
or more disk drives. 

disk drive: A device that loads information from disks into the memory of the computer and 
saves information from the memory of the computer onto a disk. 

disk drive light: A light that comes on when your disk drive is loading something from or 
storing something on a disk. When the light is off, it's safe to put disks in and take disks 
out of the drive. When the light is on, don't open the disk drive door. 

disk operating system: Programs that, among other things, control the way information is 
loaded into memory, the way the computer works with the information, the way information is 
stored on a disk, and the way the computer talks to printers and other peripheral devices. 

display: A general term to describe what you see on your screen when you're using a computer. 

DOS: Short for Disk Operating System. See operating system. 

DOS 3.2: An early Apple II operating system. DOS stands for Disk Operating System; 3.2 is 
the version number. 

DOS 3.3: One of three operating systems used by the Apple lie. DOS stands for Disk Operating 
System; 3.3 is the version number. 

dot matrix printer: A type of printer that forms characters with patterns of dots. 

DOWN-ARROW: A key that you can press (in some programs) to make the cursor move down a line. 

download: To send a file from one computer to another. 

drag: A mouse expression for what you do when you move a block of text or a picture from one 
place on the display to another. Dragging involves positioning the mouse pointer on the item to 
be dragged, holding the mouse button down, moving the pointer to the new location, and 
releasing the button. 

drive 1: The disk drive where you put the program disk you want to start up. 

educational software: Software that teaches something. Compare courseware and computer-aided 
instruction. 

80-Column Text Card: A circuit board that doubles the number of characters shown across the 
screen. 

END: An Applesoft BASIC command that marks the conclusion of a program. 

envelope: A paper sleeve that protects disks when they're not in use. Compare jacket. 

error message: The computer's way of alerting you to a failure in the communication process. 
Often accompanied by a beep. 

Escape: A key you can press (in some programs) to get back to the menu or to cancel a 
procedure that's in progress. 



lie Page 54 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Extended 80-Column Text Card: A circuit board that doubles the number of characters shown 
across the screen and doubles the memory of the computer from 64K to 128K. 

Extended 80-Column Text/AppleColor Adapter Card: A circuit board that you can plug into the 
AUX. CONNECTOR slot to double the number of characters shown across the screen, to double RAM 
from 64K to 128K, and to allow you to connect an RGB-style color monitor to your Apple lie. 

file: A collection of information that you store on a disk. 

file management: A general term for copying files, deleting files, and for other housekeeping 
chores involving the contents of disks. 

filename: The name you give your file before you save it on a disk. 

filer: A set of programs that control and manipulate the files on disks. 

firmware: Another name for the programs in ROM (read-only memory). It's more permanent than 

the software in RAM (random-access memory) thus the name. 

flexible disk: Another name for floppy disk. See disk. 

floppy disk: Disks are called floppy disks or floppies because they're made of flexible 
plastic . 

format: To divide a disk into sections where information can be stored. Disks must be 
formatted before you can save information on them. Also called initializing. 

FORTH: A programming language. 

game program: A program designed for entertainment. 

graphics: A fancy word for computer pictures. 

hacker: A person who is on a first-name basis with RAM, ROM, and the microprocessor. A person 
who ' d rather write application programs than use store-bought programs . 

hand controls: Computer accessories that move creatures and objects in game programs. 

hard copy: A printed copy of something produced with the computer. 

hard disk: A disk that is permanently sealed inside a mass storage device, like the ProFile. 

hardware: Those parts of the computer that you can see and touch. The computer and the 
machines that attach to it: the disk drive, printer, and other peripheral devices. Compare 
software. 

HOME: An Applesoft BASIC command that clears the screen but doesn't erase what's in memory. 

home control devices: Devices that can control things like the temperature of your home, turn 
your lamps on and off, and monitor things like smoke and burglar alarms. 

home finance program: A program that helps with budgeting, portfolio management, tax planning, 
and so on. Like a spreadsheet only easier to use. 

/vO ERROR: A message you get when there's a problem with the way information is being 
exchanged with peripheral devices. I/O stands for input/output. 

icon: A symbol, like the symbol on the back panel of the computer that shows you where to plug 



lie Page 55 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

in the monitor. 

industry specific software: Programs designed for a particular audience doctors, lawyers, 
marine biologists. 

information service: A large data base that you can subscribe to for news, stock quotes, and 
other services . 

initialize: To prepare a disk so the computer can store information on it. Another word for 
format . 

input/output: Abbreviated I/O. Refers to the means by which information is sent between the 
computer and its peripheral devices . 

integrated circuit: Networks of microfine wire that conduct electrical impulses. They are 
etched on silicon wafers and embedded in black plastic. 

integrated software: A group of application programs, usually on one disk, designed to share 
data. 

interface: Hardware or software that links the computer to a device. 

interface card: See peripheral card. 

interpreter: A program that translates the English-like terms in a programming language like 
BASIC into a form the computer can understand. Compare compiler. 

inverse characters: Inverse means opposite. If characters ordinarily show up as white 
characters on a black screen, inverse characters would show up as black characters on a white 
screen. 

jacket: A square of plastic that protects a flexible disk. You don't remove the jacket (and 
expect to ever use the disk again). Compare envelope. 

joystick: An accessory that moves creatures and objects in game programs. 

K: Short for kilobyte. It's how computer memory is measured. The Apple lie has 64K of RAM 
(random-access memory) expandable to 128K with an extended 80-column card, and 16K of ROM 
(read-only memory). One K is equal to 1024 bytes. 

keyboard: Your way of communicating with the computer. It looks like the keyboard on a 
typewriter, but programmers can make the keys do anything they want them to. 

keypad: See numeric keypad. 

kilobyte: A measurement of computer memory. One kilobyte equals 
1024 bytes, and it takes one byte to make one character. 

label: A strip of paper you stick on a flexible disk to identify it. The label is a good 
place to put your thumb when you pick up your disks. 

LEFT-ARROW: A key you can use (in most programs) to move the cursor one character to the left. 
In some programs, pressing LEFT-ARROW erases characters to the left as the cursor moves to the 
left. 

LET: An Applesoft BASIC command used to define variables. 



lie Page 56 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

letter quality printer: See daisy wheel printer. 

line feed: Act of advancing to the next line. 

line number: A number that tells the computer the order in which to carry out the instructions 
in a BASIC program. 

LISP: A programming language. 

LIST: An Applesoft BASIC command that lets you see the program in memory. 

load: To put data or programs into the computer from a disk. 

Logo: A computer language that encourages learning through discovery. Easy and fun to learn, 
but powerful enough for serious application programming. 

machine language: The language of ones and zeros that is the only language the computer 
understands. All other languages, like BASIC, have to be translated into this binary code 
before the computer can understand them. 

main circuit board: A large circuit board that holds RAM, ROM, the microprocessor, 
custom-integrated circuits, and other components that make the computer a computer. 

main memory: See random access memory. 

mainframe computer: A computer with far greater processing power and memory capacity than a 
personal computer, but harder to pay for and carry from room to room. 

mass storage device: A device, like the Apple ProFile, that can store the equivalent of dozens 
of floppy disks. 

memory: Integrated circuits (chips) that store instructions for the microprocessor (the brain) 
of the computer. There are two kinds of memory: temporary memory (called RAM), and permanent 
memory (called ROM) . The contents of random-access memory disappears when you turn off the 
power; the contents of read-only memory do not. 

menu: A list of choices. 

microprocessor: The brain of the computer. The Apple lie has a 65C02, eight-bit 
microprocessor . 

modem: Short for MOdulator/DEModulator . A device that links your computer to other computers 
and information services over telephone lines. 

Modula-2: A programming language. 

monitor: It looks like a TV, but it doesn't have channels. It displays instructions from the 
program to you and shows what you've typed into memory. 

monochrome monitor: A black and white, amber and black, or green and black monitor. 

mouse: A pointing device that makes it easy to draw pictures, select from lists, and move 
things around the screen. 

mouse button: The button on top of the mouse. You press it to select from menus or when you 
want to move items around on the screen. 



lie Page 57 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

mouse-driven: A phrase used to describe a program that lets you use a mouse. 

MousePaint: A sketching program from Apple. 

MouseText: Special characters, like check marks and little apples, that make programs more fun 
or more intuitive to use. 

MS-DOS: The operating system for programs designed to run on the IBM personal computer. 

music synthesizer: A device that can simulate musical instruments and help you create your own 
compositions . 

network: A bunch of computers linked together. 

NEW: An Applesoft BASIC command that erases memory so you can start a new program from 
scratch. 

numeric keypad: A device with number keys arranged in an adding machine layout that generate 
the same characters as their counterparts on the top row of the Apple lie keyboard. 

on-line: On-line means that a device is connected or that data is accessible to the computer. 

OPEN-APPLE: A key that programmers can use to control the way other keys work in a program. 
Compare  . 

open architecture: A computer with an open-lid policy that invites add-on devices. 

operating system: A program that, among other things, controls the way information is loaded 
into memory, the way the computer works with the information, the way information is stored on 
a disk, and the way the computer talks to printers and other peripheral devices. ProDOS, DOS 
3.3, and Pascal are three operating systems available for the Apple lie. 

output: Information traveling out of the computer. 

oval cutout: An opening in the disk jacket through which the disk drive read/write head reads 
from and writes to the disk. 

parallel device: A printer or other device that receives data eight bits at a time. Compare 
serial. 

parity bits: Bits used to check for errors during data transmission. 

Pascal: A programming language taught in high school and college computer science courses 
because it stresses a systematic approach to problem solving. 

password: A secret word that confirms your identity as a subscriber to an information service. 

peripheral: Short for peripheral device. 

peripheral card: A circuit board you plug into the Apple lie to link the computer to a 
peripheral device. 

peripheral device: A device that is connected to the computer, like a printer or a modem. 

PILOT: A programming language that lets instructors design their own educational software. 

pinfeed paper: A stack of attached, perforated sheets designed to feed into a printer without 



lie Page 58 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

much human intervention . 

PL/1: A complex, but flexible programming language said to combine the best features of 
FORTRAN, a programming language suited to scientific applications, and COBOL, a programming 
language suited to business applications. 

plotter: A device that prints charts and graphs. 

pointer: A marker that moves across the screen when you move the mouse across your desk (in 
mouse-driven programs). Compare cursor. 

Power light: A light that tells you whether or not the Apple lie is turned on. 

power strip: A device that plugs into one three-hole, grounded outlet, but which can 
accommodate four or six three-pronged plugs. A must if you have more than two devices that 
need to be plugged into a grounded, three-hole outlet. 

power supply: A box that draws electrical power out of the power outlet and converts it to 
power the computer can use to do its computing. 

power switch: A rocker switch on the back of the computer that you turn on when you want to 
use your computer. 

print buffer card: A card that plugs into a printer interface card that lets your Apple lie 
send an entire file to the printer at one time so you can use your computer for other things 
while the file is being printed. 

printer: A device that produces a paper copy of the information you create using the computer. 

ProDOS: Short for Professional Disk Operating System. The primary operating system for the 
Apple lie. See operating system. 

ProDOS User's Disk: A set of programs for manipulating files created with ProDOS-based 
programs. See utilities. 

ProFile: A mass storage device that can hold the equivalent of dozens of floppy disks. 

program: (n.) Instructions that tell the computer what to do. (v.) To write instructions for 
the computer to talk to the computer in terms it understands . 

program disk: A disk containing an operating system and a self -starting program. 

program manager: A program that lets you select application programs from a menu, once the 
applications are stored on a mass storage device like the ProFile, rather than swapping program 
disks and restarting the computer. 

programmer: A person who writes computer programs. 

prompt: A bracket (]) that appears on the screen when a program or programming language is 
waiting for you to supply information. 

public domain software: Software that is free for the taking. You can get it at users group 
meetings or through computer bulletin boards. 

pull-down menu: A menu that is hidden until you click on its title with the mouse. 

radio-frequency (RF) modulator: A device that transforms your television set into a computer 



lie Page 59 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

display device. 

RAM: See random-access memory. 

RAM card: A card that lets you expand the memory of your Apple lie far beyond 128K to take 
advantage of more sophisticated application programs. 

random-access memory (RAM) : Temporary memory. RAM stores programs and data for the 
microprocessor . 

read: To get information from a disk and put it in memory. 

read-only memory (ROM) : Permanent memory. Applesoft BASIC is stored in ROM. 

read/write head: The mechanism inside the disk drive that gets information from disks and 
records information on disks. 

remote computer: A computer that's across the room or across the country. 

reserved words: Words or abbreviations that have special meaning in Applesoft BASIC programs 
and therefore can ' t be used as variables . 

RESET: A key that you can press in combination with CONTROL and OPEN-APPLE to restart a 
program. 

resistor: An electrical circuit item on the main circuit board. 

restart: Start the computer again. What you do when you press OPEN-APPLE-CONTROL-RESET. 

Return: A key that you can press to move the cursor to the beginning of the next line. Also 
used in many programs to indicate that you ' ve finished doing something and are ready to 
proceed. 

RGB color monitor: An acronym for red, green, blue. A type of color monitor with unusually 
good resolution. 

RIGHT-ARROW: A key you can press (in most programs) to move the cursor one character to the 
right. 

ROM: See read-only memory. 

run: Something programs do when the computer is carrying out their instructions. 

save: To store a program or data on a disk (as opposed to storing it temporarily in the memory 
of the computer). 

Scribe: Apple's thermal transfer printer. 

scroll: (v.) To move all the text on the screen (usually upward) to make room for more text. 

sector: When disks are formatted, they are divided into tracks and sectors. A sector is part 
of a track. 

serial: Things occurring one after another like soap operas. A serial interface means data is 
sent one bit at a time. Compare parallel. 

shielded cable: A cable that reduces the possibility of causing interference to radio. 



lie Page 60 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

television, and other electronic devices. 

Shift: A key that you can press in combination with another key to get uppercase letters or 
the upper character on two-character keys . 

simulation: A computerized representation of something in action. 

65C02 : The type of microprocessor (or brain) used in the Apple lie. 

slots: Long, narrow connectors inside the Apple lie that let you connect printers and other 
devices to the computer. 

software: Instructions that tell the computer what to do. They're usually stored on disks. 
Compare hardware. 

software directory: A book that lists available software. 

software pirate: A person who copies programs without the permission of the author. 

source volume: The disk you're copying from. Compare destination volume. 

SPACE bar: The bar at the bottom of the keyboard. Pressing it inserts a space character in 
your text. 

spreadsheet: A type of application program that simplifies financial planning, cost 
estimating, and other number-crunching tasks. It is laid out in columns and rows. 

start up: To load a program from a disk into the memory of the computer. 

START13: A program on the DOS 3.3 System Master disk that makes it possible to run DOS 
3.2-based programs. 

startup disk: First disk used in a two-stage startup. Contains the operating system. 

statement: A BASIC instruction. 

stop bits: One or two bits that indicate the end of a character. 

store: To file away for safekeeping. (Something you have to do with data you create using 
your computer. If you don't store your work on a disk, it will be lost forever when you turn 
off the computer) . 

SuperPILOT: Apple's version of the PILOT programming language. 

SYNTAX ERROR: An error message that usually occurs when you misspell a computer command. See 
the troubleshooting appendix for details. 

synthesizer: See music synthesizer. 

SYSOP: Short for system operator. 

system configuration: See computer system. 

system operator: The human operator of a computerized bulletin board. 

Tab: A key that you can press in some programs to move the cursor forward a preset number of 
characters (usually eight). 



lie Page 61 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

template: A form, or electronic overlay, that allows non-accountant types to use spreadsheet 
programs . 

thermal transfer printer: A quiet, inexpensive type of printer, like the Apple Scribe, that 
works essentially by burning characters on paper. 

traces: Electrical roads that connect the components on a circuit board. 

track: When disks are formatted, a series of concentric circles is magnetically drawn on the 
disk. Each of these circles is a track. 

two-stage boot: See two-stage startup. 

two-stage startup: A startup procedure that involves two disks. 

type font: Size and style of typewritten characters (bold, italic, and so on). 

UP-ARROW: A key that you can press, in some programs, to make the cursor move up one line. 

users group: A computer club where members exchange information. 

user ID: A number that identifies you as a subscriber to an information service. 

user interface: The way a computer program communicates with you. 

utilities: A set of programs that control and manipulate the information on disks. 

variable: A letter or word that is a placeholder for information that will supplied when the 
program is used. 

vertical market software: Software designed for a particular audience. 

video monitor: See monitor. 

VisiCalc: The original electronic spreadsheet program for personal computers. 

voice input device: A device that translates the spoken word into a form that some software 
can process. 

volume: Another word for disk. 

word processing: A type of application designed to make writing and editing easier and faster. 

wrap-around: The thing that happens in some programs when the cursor reaches the right margin 
it jumps to the start of the next line without you pressing Return. 

write: Record information on a disk. 

write-enable notch: A small, square cutout in the upper-right corner of the disk that 
indicates whether or not information can be recorded on the disk. 

write protect: To prevent accidental changes to the contents of a disk by covering the 
write-enable notch. Compare copy protect. 

write-protect tab: A piece of tape that you can use to cover the write-enable notch on a disk 
so information can't be recorded on it. 



lie Page 62 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Z80 Card: A circuit board containing a Z80 microprocessor. An Apple lie equipped with a Z80 
card can run programs based on the popular CP/M operating system. 



Apple II Family Differences 

There are thousands of programs for the Apple II family of computers. 

Running Apple II Plus Programs on an Apple lie 

Here are some of the idiosyncracies involved in running a program designed for the Apple II 
Plus on an Apple lie. 

Programs designed for the Apple II Plus don't recognize lowercase characters. Press down Caps 
Lock and the program should run just fine. 

The Apple II Plus didn't have DELETE, so programs designed for the Apple II Plus won't respond 
when you press DELETE. The program will tell you some other way of deleting characters. 

The Apple II Plus didn't have UP-ARROW or DOWN-ARROW, so programs designed for the Apple II 
Plus won't move the cursor up or down when you press these keys. The program will tell you 
some other way of moving the cursor up and down. 



Running Apple lie Programs on an Apple lie 

Here are some of the idiosyncracies involved in running a program designed for the Apple lie on 
an Apple lie. 

Apple lie programs may refer to your built-in disk drive. To you that means drive 1. 

Apple lie programs may refer to the printer port, the mouse port, or the communication port. 
The printer port is comparable to a printer card in slot 1. The mouse port is comparable to a 
mouse card in slot 4. The communication port is equivalent to a communication card in slot 2. 

Apple lie programs may refer to an 80/40 switch. You can get an 80-eolumn display by adding an 
80-eolumn card to the AUX. CONNECTOR slot. 

Some programs designed for the Apple lie may require 128K. The Apple lie comes with 64K, but 
you can run such programs by adding an extended 80-column card to the AUX. CONNECTOR slot 
inside your Apple lie. 



Running Older Apple lie Programs on Your Apple lie 

The Apple lie has been enhanced so that you can take advantage of software developed for the 
Apple lie software that runs faster and has better graphics than was possible on earlier models 
of the Apple lie. The enhancement, which involves four chips on the main circuit board, does 
not in itself give you improved graphics and speed. You must use software that takes advantage 
of the enhanced features . 



He Page 63 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

One of the enhancements makes it possible for programmers to use special symbols that make 
using programs more intuitive and fun. 

Programs designed for earlier models of the Apple II won't take advantage of these special 
characters at least not intentionally. But you may notice little apples and check marks in 
place of uppercase inverse characters in older programs. 

Here's why: The original character generator ROM (the program in ROM that generates the 
characters that appear on your screen) had two identical sets of uppercase inverse characters, 
one of which was unnecessary. In the new character generator ROM, the redundant set of 
uppercase inverse characters has been replaced with mousetext characters. Older Apple lie 
programs that used the redundant set of uppercase inverse characters now display mousetext 
characters in their place. 

This doesn't have any effect on the way the program works, so if it doesn't bother you, go 
ahead and use the program. 

If it does bother you and you would like to get an upgraded version of the program, see your 
dealer or contact the developer of the program. Most popular Apple lie programs have been 
upgraded to take advantage of mousetext. 
With a few older Apple lie programs, you may encounter more serious problems: 

Programs that use reserved memory locations may stop in midstream. (This is mainly a problem 
with homemade, hacker software, since most programs use the standard memory locations.) 

The copy protection schemes of some programs may cause them not to start up. (This problem is 
mostly confined to game software.) 

If you encounter these problems, contact your dealer or the developer of the software to find 
out if an upgraded version of the software is available. 



Troubleshooting 

Making mistakes is part of the learning process. In fact, if you don't make a few mistakes, 
you're not being very adventurous, and you're typing too cautiously. This appendix is designed 
to help you recover from mistakes. 

General Troubleshooting Tips 

Some programs are better than others at shielding you from disaster. And some programs are 
friendlier than others when it comes to error messages. Friendly programs will tell you what 
you did wrong and how to fix it. Unfriendly programs will beep and display a cryptic message. 
If you run into an unfriendly program that doesn't tell you what to do about your mistake, try 
these remedies : 

Check your typing. (The computer is very literal. If you type RIN instead of RUN, it won't. 
If you type a lowercase 1 instead of a 1 , it won't know what you're talking about.) 

Press Caps Lock down. (Programs designed for earlier models of the Apple II accept entries 
only in uppercase.) 



lie Page 64 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Check the manual to see if you did the procedure correctly. 

Get help from someone who knows how to use the program. 

Get help from your dealer. (But keep in mind that the dealer carries a library of software and 
won't be intimately acquainted with every feature of each program.) 

Symptoms and Remedies 

If those general troubleshooting tips don't help, here's a list of specific symptoms, probable 
causes, and suggestions for recovering from a variety of disasters. 

With any luck, the remedy in the right column will get you back on track. Good luck. 



Problems Starting Up a Program 

Nothing happens when you turn on the power. (Drive 1 doesn't make a sound.) 

The power cord isn't plugged into the wall, the power cord isn't plugged into the computer, or 
the disk drive isn't connected to the computer. Turn the power off, then make sure the power 
cord is plugged into a power source and plugged into the computer, then try again. If that's 
not the problem, make sure the disk drive is connected. 

Nothing appears on the screen when you turn on the power (even though the disk light comes on 
and you hear the usual amount of whirring from the disk drive) . 

The monitor isn't turned on, the monitor isn't plugged in, or the monitor contrast or 
brightness isn't adjusted properly. If that's not the problem, a card in slot 3 could be 
interfering with your display. Turn on the monitor. Plug in the monitor. Adjust the monitor 
contrast or brightness knob. If that's not the problem, and you've got a card in slot 3, turn 
off the power, then try removing the card and starting up the program. 

Program disk won't start up drive 1 keeps whirring. 

Program disk is damaged. Press CONTROL-RESET to stop the disk drive. Contact your dealer and 
get a replacement. 

Program disk won't start up drive 1 whirs briefly. 

Drive 1 needs to be aligned or adjusted. Have your dealer adjust the disk drive. 



Program won't start up. All you see is a prompt ] and a cursor. 

The program on the disk isn't self -starting. (You're most apt to run into this situation if 
you're using programs written by friends or acquired at a users group meeting.) 

For DOS 3.3 disks, type CATALOG and press Return. This should produce a list (or catalog) of 



He 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 



Page 65 of 74 



what's on the disk. You can run any of the programs with the letter A in front of them by 
typing RUN, the name of the program, and then pressing Return. You can run some of the 
programs with the letter B in front of them by typing BRUN, the name of the program, and then 
Return. (The letters A and B refer to the program's file type.) For ProDOS disks, type CAT 
and press Return. 

Disk drive makes an even whirring sound when you try to start up or load a program from a 
particular disk. 

The disk is probably formatted by an early version of DOS (DOS 3.2 or earlier). There is a 
program on the DOS 3.3 System Master disk called START13 that enables you to load DOS 3.2 
programs. If you didn't get a DOS 3.3 System Master disk with your disk drive, ask your dealer 
or a friend to make you a copy of their System Master disk, then follow these directions for 
loading D03 3.2 programs: 



BASICS Disk 



DOS 3.2 programs may tell you to boot the BASICS disk, as a way to load DOS 3.2 programs. 
BASICS disk is no longer supplied with DOS because the START13 program is easier to use. 



The 



Start up your System Master disk. 

Type RUN START13 and press Return. 

You'll see the message 13-SECTOR BOOT UTILITYSLOT TO BOOT FROM (DEFAULT=6)? 

Remove the System Master disk, put the DOS 3.2 disk in drive 1, and press Return to indicate 
that your disk controller card is in slot 6, the default slot. (If your controller card is in 
some other slot, type the slot number before you press Return.) 



Problems With the Disk Drive 

Here are some common problems you might have with your disk drive. 

You see the message: DRIVE TOO FAST 

Your disk drive speed is too fast. Have the speed of your disk drive adjusted. 

You see the message: DRIVE TOO SLOW 

Your disk drive speed is too slow. Have the speed of your disk drive adjusted. 



The disk drive won't stop whirring. 

There's no disk in drive 1, or the disk in drive 1 isn't formatted. Press CONTROL-RESET to stop 
the disk drive, then put a program disk in drive 1 and start up again. 



lie Page 66 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

The wrong disk drive whirs when you start up a program. 

The disk drive that whirs when you turn on the power is drive 1. Stop the whirring disk drive 
by pressing CONTROL-RESET then put your program disk in drive 1 and start again. 



Problems With the Printer 

Unintentional double or triple spacing. 

Both your printer and your application program are generating line feeds after every carriage 
return. Turn off the automatic line feed switch on the printer (or change the application 
program's line feed setting to OFF). 

Lines are printing on top of each other. 

Neither your printer nor your application program is generating line feeds after carriage 
returns. Turn on the automatic line feed switch on your printer. 

Problems With the Modem 

General garbage appears on the screen. 

Your modem is sending or receiving information at a different speed or in a different format 
from the modem on the other end of the phone line. Check the information supplied by the 
information service to be sure you have supplied the correct settings for things like baud rate 
and number of data bits, stop bits, parity bits. 

Problems With the Monitor 

Nothing appears on the screen when you turn on the power. (Drive 1 doesn't make a sound.) 

The power cord isn't plugged into the wall, the power cord isn't plugged into the computer, or 
the disk drive isn't connected to the computer. Turn the power off, then make sure the power 
cord is plugged into a power source and plugged into the computer, then try again. If that's 
not the problem, make sure the disk drive is connected. 

Nothing appears on the screen when you turn on the power (even though the disk light comes on 
and you hear the usual amount of whirring from the disk drive) . 

The monitor isn't turned on, the monitor isn't plugged in, or the monitor contrast or 
brightness isn't adjusted properly. If that's not the problem, a card in slot 3 could be 
interfering with your display. Turn on the monitor. Plug in the monitor. Adjust the monitor 
contrast or brightness knob. If that's not the problem, and you've got a card in slot 3, turn 
off the power, then try removing the card and starting up the program. 

Letters appear small and blurry when you're using your television as a monitor. 
The program you're using is designed for an 80-column display. TV's can display 



lie Page 67 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

only 40 columns clearly. If the program gives you a choice, select the 40-column display 
option. If it doesn't, use a monitor (if available). 

Unusual characters (little arrows, check marks and arrows) appear on the screen intermingled 
with regular text. 

The application program you're using was designed for earlier models of the Apple lie and is 
using a character set now reserved for mouse characters. Ask your dealer if you can replace 
your program for an upgraded version. 

Screen image is too bright or too dim. 

Monitor contrast or brightness isn't set properly. Adjust the monitor contrast or brightness 
knob until the display is easy to read. 

Problems Switching From One Program to Another 

Gibberish appears on the screen when you attempt to switch from one program to another by 
turning the power off then on again. 

The first program wasn't entirely erased from memory before the next program was loaded. Wait 
15 seconds before restarting your computer. Better yet, switch from one program to another by 
pressing OPEN-APPLE-CONTROL-RESET . 

Problems Saving Data on a Disk 

You see the message: DISK WRITE-PROTECTED 

The program needs to write something on a disk, but it can't because you've covered the 
write-enable notch with a write-protect tab, or the disk was write-protected by the 
manufacturer to keep you from altering it. If the disk has a write-protect tab, you could 
remove it, but think twice. You put the tab there to protect the disk. Are you sure you want 
to remove the protection? 

You see the message: DUPLICATE FILE NAME 

You tried to use a name you'd already used on that disk. Give the file a different name and 
repeat the save procedure. 

Problems Extricating Yourself From a Program 

Most programs give you an easy way out. If your program doesn't have a Quit option on the 
menu, try these escape methods (until you find one that works): 

Press Q for Quit. 

Press Escape. 

Press CONTROL-C 

Press CONTROL-C, then press Return. 

Press CONTROL-RESET. 

Press OPEN-APPLE-CONTROL-RESET. 



He Page 68 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Turn off the power. 



Problems Decoding an Error Message 

You see the message: SYNTAX ERROR 

Some programs require all your entries to be in uppercase. You typed something in lowercase. 
It's also possible that the program doesn't recognize the command or instruction you typed 
maybe it's misspelled. Press Caps Lock down and type your entry again. Check your typing. If 
you made a mistake, retype the command. 

You see the message: /vO ERROR 

You put the wrong disk in the disk drive, probably a blank (unformatted) one, or there's a poor 
connection between your computer and your printer or disk drive. If that's not the problem, 
your disk drive speed might need adjusting. Take the disk out of the disk drive and see if 
it's the one you thought it was. If it's not, replace it, and repeat what you were doing when 
you got the error message. Check to make sure your printer and disk drive are securely plugged 
into the computer. If that doesn't solve the problem, have your dealer adjust your disk drive 
speed. 

I/O stands for input/output. 

Input refers to information that's traveling into the computer (from the keyboard, for 
example) . Output refers to information traveling out of the computer (to a printer, for 
example) . When you get an /vO ERROR message, it means there was a problem with the exchange of 
information between the computer and one of its peripheral devices. You can usually guess what 
the problem is based on what you were trying to do when the message appeared. If you're trying 
to print something, the problem is probably the connection between the computer and the 
printer. If you're trying to load something from or save something to a disk, the problem is 
with the disk drive. 

Other Error Messages 

Error messages can come from the operating system, the application program, or the programming 
language you're using. If the message came from the operating system, it is explained in the 
manual that came with your operating system. (ProDOS messages, for example, are explained in 
the ProDOS User's Manual.) If the message came from the application program, it should be 
explained in the manual that came with the program. If the message came from the programming 
language, it's explained in your programming reference manual. 

Follow the instructions in the troubleshooting section of your operating system manual, 
applications program manual, or programming reference manual. 



Standard Features 

64K RAM 

65C02 Microprocessor 



lie Page 69 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

16K ROM, including Applesoft BASIC 

Memory expansion slot 

Seven slots for peripheral device interface cards 

Typewriter-style keyboard, with access to all 128 ASCII characters 

Speaker 

Hand control input and output 

Cassette recorder input and output 

Color graphics capability 

Programming Languages Available 

BASIC 

Pascal 

Logo 

6502/65C02 Machine Language 

COBOL 

FORTRAN 

SuperPILOT 

FORTH 

C 

PL/1 

LISP 

Modula-2 

Operating Systems 

ProDOS 

DOS 3.3 

D03 3.2 (using the START13 program on the DOS 3.3 System Master disk) 

DOS 3.2: 

You can use DOS 3.2-based programs on your Apple lie, but you first have to load the START13 
program from the DOS 3.3 System Master. 

Pascal 

CP/M (With a Z80 card) 

MS-DOS (With a co-processor card) 

Popular Peripherals 

Printer thermal, dot matrix, letter quality 

Color plotter 

Modem 300 baud, 12 00 baud 

Monitor monochrome, RGB color 

Disk drive 



lie Page 70 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

ProFile 

Mouse 

Hand controls, joystick 

Numeric keypad 

80-column card with 64K memory expansion 

80-column card with 64K memory expansion and RGB video 

Ask Apple 

Now that you've spent some time with the Apple lie, you probably have lots of questions that 
never occurred to you before you actually tried out a computer. In this section, the questions 
new Apple users frequently ask are answered. If you have other questions, ask your dealer, 
people at an Apple users group, or send your inquiry to one of the Apple magazines. 

Can I run software for other computers on the Apple lie? 

The software that runs on the Apple lie is software that uses one of Apple's operating systems: 
ProDOS, DOS, or Pascal. Software written for other computers doesn't use these operating 
systems and consequently won't work on the Apple unless you install a co-processor card. (See 
Chapter 6.) You will find, however, that almost all major software publishers have versions of 
software that run on the Apple lie. 

Sometimes I hear horror stories about people typing pages and pages of information and then 
having it disappear. How can I prevent this from happening to me? 

Save! Save! Save! Every program has a way for you to transfer information from the 
computer's memory to a file on a disk. Once stored on a disk, information is safe, or at least 
a lot safer than it is when it's only in your computer's memory. That's because information 
stays in memory only as long as the power is on and the computer is working properly. Power 
surges, electrical failures, computer failures, and klutzy friends who trip over power cords 
are rare, but they invariably happen just after you've written your cleverest program or most 
heartfelt letter. By saving frequently to a disk (at least every 10 minutes) you're guaranteed 
that, no matter what, you won't lose too much valuable information. But saving to a disk is 
only half the secret. At the end of the day, always make a backup copy of your disk. No 
matter how careful you are, disks get damaged. The only way to guard against a damaged disk is 
to have a spare copy. 

Can software break? 

Yes, sometimes software just doesn't work the way it's supposed to. But then again, sometimes 
hardware doesn't work the way it's supposed to, and still other times, users don't work the way 
they're supposed to. What this means is that, although software may appear broken, the problem 
often is with hardware or, believe it or not, the user. If you think your software is broken, 
try reading the manual. It's possible that the software is meant to work the way it's working. 
If, after reading the manual, you still think the software is not working correctly, do a 
repeat test: Note the error and then follow the same sequence of steps to see if you can get 
the error to happen again. Assuming it does, your next task is to figure out whether the 
problem's with a piece of hardware, such as the computer or disk drive, or with the software. 
Try running other programs on your computer. If they also don't work properly, chances are 
that hardware is the problem. If you try running the broken software on your dealer's computer 
and have the same problem, you probably have a real software bug on your hands. Once you've 
caught a bug, report it to your dealer. He may have a patch (a corrected piece of software), 
or he may be able to help you work around the problem. If your dealer can't help, contact the 
software publisher directly; many have toll-free telephone numbers. 



lie Page 71 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

How much do I need to know about operating systems? 

Unless you're planning on some heavy-duty programming, using a general utilities disk is the 
closest you need to get to an operating system. If, on the other hand, you've decided that 
programming is for you, you'll probably need more in-depth knowledge. If you'll be doing BASIC 
programming, read BASIC Programming With ProDOS and the ProDOS Technical Reference Manual. 
Some BASIC programmers may want to write programs using DOS, the operating system Apple used 
before ProDOS. If you want to write DOS programs, you'll need to purchase the DOS User's Kit. 
Finally, if you want to write Pascal programs, you'll need the Pascal operating system and the 
accompanying manual. Logo uses the ProDOS operating system; the Logo manuals explain how to 
use ProDOS with Logo. 

What does ProDOS do that DOS doesn't do? 

ProDOS directly supports all Apple disk storage devices, including the ProFile, Apple's large 
capacity storage device. ProDOS increases the acessibility of disk storage because of extra 
commands and disk read and write functions are faster under ProDOS. 

What's booting? 

In computer lingo, booting means starting up your computer. When you turn on the power, a 
built-in program (the Monitor program) is put into memory, where it turns on the disk drive. 
The disk drive then transfers the startup program on the disk to the computer's memory. All 
this must happen before the computer is ready to work. So, quite literally, booting is letting 
the computer pull itself up by its own bootstraps, which is how the term originated. 

Is my Apple very fragile? I keep thinking I'm going to break it. 

Your Apple is about as fragile as your television set or stereo. You will never break your 
Apple by pressing the wrong keys, just as you won't break your TV by turning to the wrong 
channel . 

Are disks fragile? 

Yes, believe it or not, disks are a lot more susceptible to damage than your computer. In 
fact, damaged disks are probably the greatest cause of what people think is a broken computer 
or broken software. Dust is a disk's greatest enemy. To guard against it, always keep disks 
in their envelopes. Also, keep disks away from extreme heat, sunlight, liquids, and anything 
that contains a magnet, like a telephone. It's best to store disks in a disk holder. (If you 
don't have a special disk holder, a shoe box works fine.) Finally, when preparing disk labels, 
write them first, then stick them on the disk. If you must write on a label that's already on 
a disk, make sure you use a felt-tip pen, rather than a ball-point pen. Using a pencil or 
ball-point pen could dent the surface of the disk. 

Is it OK to use both sides of a disk? 

Not usually. The disk that came with manual is specially made for two-sided use. 

Do I need two disk drives? 

No, you can use almost all software with one disk drive. A second disk drive just makes using 
your computer a little easier. The time when a second drive comes in most handy is when you're 
making backup copies of disks. If you copy a disk using only one disk drive, you have to do a 
lot of swapping that is, swapping your original and backup disks in and out of your disk drive. 
If you have a second disk drive, you can put your original disk in one drive, your backup in 
the other, press a few keys, and then let your computer do the work. 



lie Page 72 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

How much electricity does my Apple use? 

Your Apple lie system, complete with monitor, uses less electricity than a 100-watt light bulb. 

Should I turn off my Apple after using it? 

If you're going to be away for more than an hour or two, it's a good idea to turn off your 
computer, just so you don't waste electricity. If you're just taking a stretch or grabbing a 
drink, leave your Apple on (but save what you're working on before you get up). 

Do I need a power surge protector to make sure my computer doesn't blow up? 

First of all, computer blow-ups and smoke-outs are things of the past. Today, about the most 
dramatic result of a power surge or electrical storm is lost data. Even losing data is 
extremely rare, however, since your computer has a built-in mechanism to guard against changes 
in electrical power. The only people who may want to invest in a protector are those who are 
extremely cautious and those who live in areas that are particularly prone to electrical 
storms, hurricanes, and electrical failures. 

Do I need to touch type to use a computer? 

No, you don't need to know how to touch type. Lots of people who use the hunt and peck method 
(that is, they hunt for each key as they need it) do just fine. In fact, hunt and peckers 
report greatly increased typing speeds after a few days with a computer. If you want to learn 
to touch type, you may want to buy a typing program. These programs give you typing 
instructions right on the screen. 

What ' s K and how much do I need? 

To understand what a K or kilobyte is, you first need to know what a byte is. A byte is the 
space one letter or digit takes up in the computer's memory. A kilobyte is equal to 1024 bytes. 
That means that a computer with 64K, like the Apple lie, can store a little more than 64,000 
characters in its memory. The more kilobytes your computer has, the more information it can 
store and the larger the programs it can run. 64K is enough memory for most home and business 
applications . 

Is it bad for your eyes to look at the screen for too long? 

We don't know of any studies that have found that staring at a monitor is harmful to your eyes. 
Some people do, however, report getting headaches or eye strain after lengthy tete-a-tetes with 
their computer. Current thinking is that these symptoms are caused by sitting in the same 
position for long periods rather than from the way information is displayed. In any event, 
it's a good idea to get up and stretch, just to give your eyes a rest and your body a chance to 
get moving. 

How do I use (get to) the extra memory in my Apple lie that I get by adding an extended memory 
card? 

You don't have to do anything. Software programs that need 128K use the memory automatically. 

How can I get in touch with an Apple Users Group? What are the meetings like? 

Send a self-addressed, stamped envelope to: 

International Apple Core 908 George Street Dept. UG Santa Clara CA 95050 

They will send you a list of user groups in your state. Meetings are informal gatherings of 

Apple owners like yourself. At a meeting you can expect to get assistance setting up your 



lie Page 73 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

computer, you can get questions answered. You'll enjoy the social and informational tone of 
the meetings. If you choose to join the group, you may be asked for a small fee to cover 
membership. 

Is there really a way to get free software? 

Well, nothing is ever free. But you can get very inexpensive public domain software when you 
join an Apple user's group. The User's group may charge a small fee to cover their expenses, 
or they may ask that you provide a blank, formatted disk so that you can copy public domain 
software quickly. 

Are parts for my Apple lie computer easy to get? 

Apple's service is oriented toward modular repair, rather than supplying parts to customers. 
Apple computer modules are available to your dealer, please see him or her if you have a 
question. 

Why doesn't Apple offer a one year warranty for the Apple lie computer? 

Our 90-day warranty is the industry standard that covers faulty materials or workmanship. 
Apple offers an inexpensive repair insurance called AppleCare. Please ask your Apple 
authorized dealer for details. 

How do I clean my disk drive? 

We don't recommend that you try to clean your drive. Floppy disk jackets lubricate the disks 
as you use them. If you have problems with your disk drive, see your Apple dealer. He or she 
can clean it or repair it for you. 

I got my Apple lie before I moved. Will dealers in my new neighborhood honor the warranty and 
help me with questions? 

Any Apple authorized dealer is happy to honor your warranty and is trained to answer questions 
about Apple products . 

Can I take my Apple lie overseas as it is? 

No. You need to buy a heavy-duty, step down transformer from your dealer so that your computer 
system will handle European differences. Here's the formula for deciding which voltage 
transformer you'll need. Look on the back of each piece of equipment in your computer system 
and find the voltage requirement. Now add those numbers together. Then buy a transformer that 
meets your total system requirements. A typical Apple lie system requires a 100-watt 
transformer. Also be sure to purchase a monitor for your computer in the United States, 
because European monitors are different and may not work as well with your system as one you 
buy state-side. Again, consult your dealer about overseas requirements. 

How did Apple get its name? 

The name Apple Computer was chosen late one afternoon as Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, Apple's 
founders, faced the deadline for filing a Fictitious Name Statement, part of the business 
licensing procedures. After volleying names back and forth with Wozniak for hours, Jobs looked 
at the apple he was eating and decided that, unless he or Woz arrived at something better by 
five o'clock, they would call the company Apple. Five o'clock came and went; Apple was the new 
company ' s name . 

Is there such a thing as the Apple I? 



lie Page 74 of 74 

Printed: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 10:40:15 AM 

Yes. The Apple I was the first computer that Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak created. The 
computer had no case, and you had to purchase your own keyboard. There were no disk drives back 
then, so all programs had to be stored on cassette tape. Really, though, the Apple I was the 
most user friendly computer of its day since it required only a minimum of time and technical 
know-how to put it together. About 200 Apple I's were built. The computer was designed at 
night in a lab at Hewlett-Packard and manufactured in the garage of Steve Jobs ' parents . 
Unless you're a collector, the Apple I isn't much of a bargain; the computer sells for between 
$10,000 and $15,000. 

Did the Apple I have a manual? 

You bet. It was about eight pages long. 

Who designed the Apple logo? 

The Apple logo was designed by Regis McKenna, a Silicon Valley public relations firm. The 
original Apple logo was a design of Newton under an Apple tree. But Newton didn't lend himself 
to reproduction, so Regis McKenna was called in to create an insignia that could be replicated 
more easily. 

Should I worry if I find myself talking to my Apple lie? 

No. Lots of people talk to their computers, especially when they're just learning to use them. 
What's nice about the current crop of computers is that they can't understand what you're 
saying. In a decade or so, you may have to watch your language. 



